1 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________ 
 
THE PUNJAB EXCISE ACT, 1914 
(1 of 1914) 
_______________________________ 
 
 2THE PUNJAB EXCISE ACT, 1914 
(1 OF 1914) 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
PRELIMINARY 
 
Sections 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Repeal of enactments. 
3. Definitions. 
4. Country liquor and foreign liquor. 
5. Power of State Government to declar e limit of sale by retail and by 
wholesale. 
6. Power to limit application of notifications, permits, etc. made under this 
Act. 
7. Saving of enactments. 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
ESTABLISHMENT AND CONTROL 
 
8. Omitted. 
9. Superintendence and control of the excise administration and excise 
officers. 
10. Other classes of excise officers, th eir powers and the mode of conferring 
powers. 
11. Power to invest persons with special powers. 
12. Local limits of jurisdiction. 
13. Omitted. 
14. Appeal. 
15. Revision. 
 3 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
IMPORT, EXPORT AND TRANSPOR 
 
16. Import, export and transport of intoxicants. 
17. Power of sate government to prohib it import, export and transport of 
intoxicants. 
18. Passes necessary for import, export and transport. 
19. Grant of passes for import, export and transport. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
MANUFACURE, POSSESSION AND SALE 
 
20. Manufacture of intoxicant s prohibited excep t under the provisions of the 
Act. 
21. Establishment or licensing of distilleries. 
22. Establishment or licensing of warehouses. 
23. Removal of intoxicants from distillery etc. 
24. Possession of intoxicants, excepti ons, restrictions and prohibitions. 
25. Prohibition of possession of intoxicants unlawfully manufactured, imported, 
etc. 
26. Sale of intoxicants. 
27. Grant of lease of manufacture, etc. 
28. Manufacture and sale of liquor in Military Cantonments. 
29. Prohibition of sale to persons un der the age of twenty-five years. 
30. Prohibition of employment of men under the age of twenty-five years and 
of women. 
 
CHAPTER V 
 4 
DUTIES AND FEES 
 
31. Duty on excisable articles. 
32. Manner in which duty may be levied. 
33. Payment for grant of leases. 
33A. Omitted. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
LICENSES, PERMITS AND PASSES 
 
34. Fees for, terms, conditions and form of, and duration of licenses, permits, 
passes and security. 
35. Grant of licenses for sale; asce rtainment of public opinion. 
36. Power to cancel or suspend licenses, etc. 
37. Power to cancel any other license. 
38. Power to recover fee. 
39. Power of Collector to take grants under management or to resell. 
40. No compensation or refund claimabl e for cancellation or suspension of 
licenses etc., under this section. 
41. Power to withdraw licenses. Compensa tion in the case of withdrawal and 
refund of fee or deposit. 
42. Technical irregularities in license, etc. 
43. No claim in consequence of re fusal to renew a license, etc. 
44. Surrender of license. 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS ETC. 
 
45. Power to enter and inspect pl aces of manufacture and sale. 
 546. Powers of excise officers to investig ate offences punishable under the Act. 
47. Powers of arrest, se izure and detention. 
48. Power of magistrate to issue warrant for search or arrest. 
49. Power of excise officer to search without warrant and further powers of 
seizure, detention, search and arrest. 
49A. Power of excise officers to obtain information. 50. Procedure relating to arrest, searches, etc. 
51. Police to aid excise officers. 
52. Duty of land holders and ot hers to give information. 
53. Duty of officer in charge of policy stat ion to take charge of article seized. 
54. Power to close shops for the sake of public peace. 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
55. Measures, weights and testing instruments. 
56. Power of Lieutenant Govern or to exempt intoxicants from the provisions of 
the Act. 
57. Bar of certain suits. 
58. Power of Lieutenant Governor to make ru les; previous publ ication of rules. 
59. Power of Excise Commissioner to make rules. 
60. Recovery of dues. 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
 
61. Penalty for unlawful import, export, transport, manufacture, possession, 
sale etc. 
62. Penalty for unlawful selling to person s under twenty-fie or employing them 
or women. 
 663. Penalty for rendering or attempting to render denatured spirit fit for human 
consumption. 
64. Penalty for fraud by licensed manuf acturer or vendor or his servant. 
65. Penalty for certain acts by licensee or his servant. 
66. Penalty for consumption in chemist’s shop, etc. 
67. Manufacture, sale or possession by one person on account of another. 
68. Penalty for offences not otherwise provided for. 
68A. Enhanced punishment for certain offences after previous conviction. 
69. Attempt to commit offences punishable under the Act. 
69A. Security for abstaining from commission of certain offences. 
70. Penalty for excise officer ma king vexations search, etc. 
71. Report by investigating officer for instituting proceedings. 
72. Offences to be bailable. 
73. Security for appearance, in ca se of arrest without warrant. 
74. (Repealed). 
75. Cognizance of offences. 
76. Presumption as to commission of offences in certain cases. 
76A. Presumption as to commission of offences under section 63 of the Act. 
77. Liability of employer for offence committed by employee or agent. 
78. Confiscation of article in respect of which offence committed and order of 
confiscation. 
79. Further provisions for confiscation. 
80. Power of excise officers to compound offences. 
 
SCHEDULE I 
SCHEDULE II 
 7THE PUNJAB EXCISE ACT, 1914 
(as extended to the Union Territory of Delhi) 
 
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 
No. Year Short title Whether repealed or 
otherwise effected by 
legislation in Punjab When extended to Delhi 
1. 1914 The Punjab 
Excise Act, 1914 
 
 
Repealed in part and 
Amended, Act XXXVIII of 
1920. 
Amended by the Punjab Act, 
II of 1925. 
Amended by the Dangerous 
Drugs Act 1930. 
Amended by the Govt. of 
India (Adaptation of Laws) 
Order 1937 
 
 
 
 
Amended by the Punjab Act, 
1 of 1940 
 
 
 Amended by the East Punjab 
Act, IX of 1948. Originally extended to Delhi 
Vide Govt. of India notification No.3246-39 
dated the 2
nd May, 1914. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Punjab Excise Act as on 
th May, 1939, was reextended to the Union Territory of Delhi vide Govt. of India, late Home Deptt., 
notification No.189/38 dated 
the 30
th May, 1939. 
 
The Punjab Act (I of 1940) 
was extended to Delhi vide 
Govt. of India, late Home 
Deptt. notification No.194/ 
39 dated the 11th September 
1940. 
 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amended by the East Punjab 
Act, XII of 1949. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amended by the Punjab 
Excise (Amendment) Act, 
1955. 
 
 
Amended by the Punjab Act, The East Punjab Act IX of 
1948 was extended to Delhi with modifications vide Govt. of India, Ministry of 
Home Affairs notification 
No.8/11/49-Judl. dated the 20
th June, 1949. 
The Govt. of India, late 
Home Deptt., notification 
No.189/38 dated the 30th 
May, 1939 in its application to Delhi was amended by the Govt. of India, Ministry of 
Home Affairs notification 
No.20/2/52-Judl. dated the 9
th June, 1952. 
 
The East Punjab Act, XII of 
1949 was partia lly adopted 
by the Punjab Excise (Delhi 
Amendment) Act, 1956 (7 of 1956). 
The remaining provisions of 
the East Punjab Act XII of 
1949 were extended to Delhi 
vide Govt. of India, Ministry of Home Affairs notification No.GSR-483 dated the 11
th 
April, 1962 read with their 
notification No.F.3/361Judl. II(i) dated the 7th July, 
1962. 
 
 Amended by the Punjab 
Excise (Delhi IInd 
Amendment) Act, 1956 (Act 
No.14 of 1956) 
 935 of 1956 
 
 
 
 
Amended by the Punjab Act, 
22 of 1963. 
Amended by the Punjab Act, 
31 of 1963. 
Amended by the Punjab Act, 
25 of 1964. 
Amended by the Punjab Act, 
8 of 1965. 
The Punjab Act No.35 of 
1956 was extended by the 
Govt. of India, Ministry of 
Home Affairs notification 
No.GSR-1114 dated the 30th 
September, 1959. 
 
 10THE PUNJAB EXCISE ACT, 1914 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY AND DEFINITIONS 
 
 
 Extent. Commencement. 1. 1) This Act may be called the Punjab Excise Act, 
1914. 
2) It extends to the whole of the Union Territory of 
Delhi. 
3) It shall come into force on such date as the 
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may, by 
notification, direct. 
Repeal of enactments 2. The enactments mentioned in Schedule (3)(I) are 
repealed to the extent specified in the fourth column 
thereof. 
Definition 3. In this Act, and the rules ma de under it, unless there is 
something repugnant in th e subject or context – 
1) ‘Beer’ includes ale, port er, stout and all other 
fermented liquors made from malt; 
2) ‘to bottle’ means to tran sfer liquor from a cask 
or other vessel to a bottle, jar, flask or similar 
receptacle whether any pr ocess of manufacture 
be employed or not, a nd bottling includes rebottling; 
3) ‘Collector’ includes any revenue officer in 
independent charge of a district and any official 
appointed by the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi to discharge throughout any specified local area, 
the functions of a Coll ector under this Act; 
4) Omitted. 
5) ‘denatured’ means effectually and permanently 
rendered unfit for human consumption; 
6) ’exicsable article’ means- 
 11a. any alcoholic liquor for human consumption; 
or 
b. any intoxicating drug; 
6a) ’excise bottle’ means a bottle of such type or 
description as may be or may have been at any 
time permitted for the bo ttling of liquor or beer 
by rules made under his Act. 
6b) ’excise duty’ and ‘cou ntervailing duty’ mean any 
such excise duty or coun tervailing duty, as the 
case may be, as is ment ioned in entry 51 of list 
II in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. 
7) Excise Commissioner means the officer 
appointed by the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi 
under section 9; 
8) ‘excise officer’ means any officer or person 
appointed, or invested with powers, under this 
Act; 
9) ‘excise revenue’ mean s revenue derived or 
derivable from any payment, duty, fee, tax, confiscation or fine, im posed or ordered under 
the provisions of this Act, or of any other law 
for the time being in forc e relating to liquor or 
intoxicating drugs, but doe s not includes fine 
imposed by a court of law; 
10) ‘export’ means to ta ke out of the Union 
Territory of Delhi otherwise than across customs frontier as defined by the Central 
Government. 
11) Omitted. 
12) ’import’ except in the ph rase ‘import into India 
means to bring into the Union Territory of Delhi 
otherwise than across a customs frontier as 
defined by the Central Government; 
12a) ’intoxicant’ means an y liquor or intoxicating 
drugs; 
 1213) ’intoxicating drug’ means – 
1) the leaves, small stalks and flowering or 
fruiting tops of the Indian hemp plant (Cannabis Sativa L) including all forms 
known as bhang, saddhi or ganja; 
2) charas, that is, the re sin obtained from the 
Indian hemp plant, which has not been submitted to any manipulations other than 
those necessary for packing and transport; 
3) any mixture, with or without neutral 
materials of any of the above forms of 
intoxicating drug or any drink prepared 
therefrom; and 
4) any other intoxicating or narcotic drug 
substance which the Lieu tenant Governor of 
Delhi may, by notificat ion declare to be an 
intoxicating drug, such substance not being opium, coca leaf or a manufactured drug, as 
defined in section 2 of the Dangerous Drugs 
Act, 1930. 
14) ‘Liquor’ means intoxicating liquor and includes 
all liquid consisting of or containing alcohol 
also any substance which the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may, by notification declare, 
to be liquor for the purpose of this Act; 
15) ‘magistrate’ means any magistrate exercising 
powers not less than those of a magistrate of the second class, or any magi strate of the third class 
specially authorized in this behalf by the district 
magistrate; 
16) ‘manufacture’ includes every process, whether 
natural or artificial by which any intoxicant is produced or prepared, and also redistillation, and every process for the rectification, reduction, flavouring, bl ending or colouring of 
liquor; 
17) ‘place’ includes a building, shop, tent, 
 13enclosure, booth, vehicle, vessel, boat and raft; 
18) expressions referring to ‘sale’ includes any 
transfer otherwise than by way of gift; 
19) ‘spirit’ means any liq uor containing alcohol 
obtained by distillation, whether denatured or 
not; 
20) ‘tari’ means fermented or unfermented juice 
drawn from any kind of palm tree; 
21) ‘transport’ means to move from one place to 
another within the Union Territory of Delhi. 
‘Country Liquor and Foreign 
Liquor’ 4. The Lieutenant Govern or of Delhi may by 
notification, declare what, for the purposes of this Act 
or any portion thereof, sha ll be deemed to be ‘country 
liquor’ and ‘foreign liquor’. 
Power of the Lieutenant 
Governor to declare limit of sale by retail and by whole 
sale. 5. The Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may be notification 
declare, with respect either to the whole of the Union Territory of Delhi or to any local area comprised 
therein and as regards purchasers generally or any 
specified occasion the maximum or minimum quantity or both of any intoxicant which for the 
purposes of this Act may be sold by retail and by 
wholesale. 
Power of limit application of 
notification, permits etc. 
make under this Act. 6. Where under this Act any notification is made, any 
power conferred, any a ppointment made or any 
license, pass or permit granted, it shall be lawful to 
direct:- 
(a) that it shall apply to the whole of the Union 
Territory of Delhi or to any specified local area or 
areas; 
(b) that it shall apply to all or any specified intoxicant 
or intoxicants or classes thereof; 
(c) that it shall apply to all or any class or classes of 
persons or officers; 
(d) that it shall be in for ce only for some special 
period or occasion. 
 14Saving of enactments. 7. Save as provided by Schedu le I nothing contained in 
this Act shall effect the provisions of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, the Cantonment Act, 1910 or the Indian 
Tariff Act, 1894 or any rule or order made thereunder. 
 
 15CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT AND CONTROL 
 
 8. Omitted. 
Superintendence and control 
of the excise administration and excise officers. 9. (a) The Lieutenant Gover nor of Delhi may by 
notification, appoint an Excise Commissioner and 
subject to the control of the Lieutenant Governor 
and unless the Lieutenant Governor shall by notification otherwise direct, the general superintendence and administration of matters 
relating to excise shal l vest in the Excise 
Commissioner. 
(b) Subject to the control of the Excise Commissioner 
and unless the Lieutena nt Governor, shall by 
notification, otherwise di rect, the Collector shall 
control all the Excise Officers in the Union 
Territory of Delhi. 
Other classes of excise 
officers. 
 
 
Their Powers. 
 Mode of conferring powers. 10. (a) There shall be such other classes of excise officers 
as the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may, by notification, declare, and the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may appoint as many persons as he 
deems fit to be excise o fficers of these classes. 
(b) The Lieutenant Governor of Delhi shall, by 
notification, declare what powers under this Act 
shall be exercised by excise officers of each class. 
(c) In conferring powers under this Act the 
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may empower 
persons by name or in vi rtue of their office or 
classes of officials generall y by their official titles. 
Power to invest persons with 
special powers under this Act. 11. The Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may, by 
notification, invest any pe rson, not being an excise 
officer, with power to perform all or any of the 
functions of an excise officer under this Act, and such 
person shall in the exercise of these functions be 
deemed to be an excise officer. 
Limits of jurisdiction 12. The jurisdiction of the Collector and other excise 
 16officers shall, unless the Excise Commissioner 
otherwise direct, extend to the whole of the Union 
Territory of Delhi. 
 13. Omitted. 
Appeal. 14. An appeal shall lie from an original or appellate order 
of an excise officer in such cases or cla sses of cases 
and to such authority as the Lieutenant Governor of 
Delhi shall, by noti fication, declare. 
Revision. 15. (a) The Excise Commissioner may, at any time, 
revise any order passed by any excise officer 
subordinate to him. 
(b) The Collector may call for the record of any case 
pending before, or dispos ed of by, any excise 
officer subordinate to him, and, if he is of opinion 
that the proceedings take n or order made should 
be modified or reversed, he shall report the case 
with his opinion thereon for the orders of the 
Excise Commissioner. 
(c) Provided that the Excise Commissioner shall not 
under this section pass an order revising or 
modifying any proceedings or order of a 
subordinate excise of ficer and affecting any 
person without giving such person an opportunity 
of being heard. 
 
 17CHAPTER III 
IMPORT, EXPORT AND TRANSPORT 
Import, export and transport 
of intoxicants. 16. No intoxicant shall be imported, exported or 
transported except – 
(a) after payment of any dut y to which it may be 
liable under this Act or execution of a bond for 
such payment, and 
(b) in compliance with such conditions as the 
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may impose. 
Power of (Lieutenant 
Governor to prohibit import, 
export and transport of 
intoxicants, 17. The Lieutenant Gover nor of Delhi may, by 
notification- 
(a) prohibit the import or export of any intoxicant 
into or form the Union Te rritory of Delhi or any 
part thereof; or 
(b) prohibit the transport of any intoxicant 
Passes necessary for import, 
export and transport 18. Except as otherwise provi ded by any rule made under 
this Act, no intoxicant ex ceeding such quantity as the 
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may prescribe by notification shall be imported, exported or transported 
except under a pass issued un der the provisions of the 
next following section; 
Provided that in the case of duty paid foreign liquor 
such passes shall be di spensed with, unless the 
Lieutenant Governor of De lhi shall by notification, 
otherwise direct. 
Provided further that on such conditions as may be 
determined by the Exci se Commissioner a pass 
 18granted under the excise law in force in another State 
may be deemed to be a pass granted under this Act. 
Grant of passes for import, 
export and transport 19. Passes for the import, export or transport of 
intoxicants may be granted by the Collector; 
Provided that passes for the im port and export of such 
intoxicants as the Excise Commissioner may, from time to time determine sh all be granted only by the 
Excise Commissioner. 
 19CHAPTER IV 
MANUFACTURE, POSSESSION AND SALE 
 
A – Manufacture. 
 
Manufacture of intoxicants 
prohibited except under the 
provisions of this Act. 20. (1) (a) No intoxicant sh all be manufactured or 
collected; 
(b) No hemp plant shall be cultivated; 
(c) No tari producing tr ee shall be tapped; 
(d) No tari shall be dr awn from any tree; and 
(e) No person shall use, keep or have in his 
possession, any material s, still, utensil, 
implement or apparatus, whatsoever, for the 
purpose of manufacturing any intoxicant 
other than tari, except under the authority 
and subject to the terms and conditions of a license granted in th at behalf by the 
Collector. 
(2) No distillery or brewer y shall be constructed or 
worked except under the au thority and subject to the 
terms and conditions of a license granted in that 
behalf of the Excise Commi ssioner under section 21. 
Establishment or licensing of 
distilleries and breweries. 21. The Excise Commissioner subj ect to such restrictions 
or conditions as the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi 
may impose, may – 
(a) establish a distillery in which spirit may be 
manufactured under a license granted under 
section 20; 
(b) discontinue any distillery so established; 
(c) license the construction and working of a 
distillery or brewery; 
(d) make rules regarding – 
1. the granting of licenses fo r distilleries, stills or 
 20breweries; 
2. the security to be deposi ted by the licensee of a 
distillery or brewery; 
3. the period for which the license shall be 
granted; 
4. the inspection and examination of such 
distillery or brewery and the warehouses connected therewith and of the spirit or 
fermented liquor made and stored therein; 
5. the management and work ing of the distillery 
or brewery; 
6. the form of accounts to be maintained and the 
returns to be submitted by the licensee; 
7. the upkeep of buildings and plant; 
8. the size and description of stills, and other 
plant; 
9. the manufacture, storing and passing out of 
spirit and the contents of passes; 
10. the prices to be charged by the licensee; 
11. any other matters connect ed with the working 
of distilleries or breweries. 
Establishment or licensing of 
warehouses. 22. The Excise Commissioner subj ect to such restrictions 
or conditions as the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi 
may impose, may – 
(a) establishment or license a warehouse wherein any 
intoxicant may be deposited and kept without 
payment of duty; 
(b) discontinue any warehou se so established. 
Removal of intoxicant from 
distillery, etc. 23. No intoxicant shall be removed from any distillery, 
brewery, warehouse or other place of storage established or licensed under this Act, unless the duty 
(if any) payable u nder Chapter V has been paid or a 
bond has been executed for the payment thereof. 
 21 
 
 
 
B – Possession. 
 
Possession of intoxicants. 24. 1) No person shall have in his possession any 
quantity of any intoxicant in excess of such 
quantity as the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi has 
under section 5, declared to be the limit of retail 
sale, except under the authority and in accordance 
with the terms and conditions of – 
(a) a license for the manufactur e, sale or supply of 
such article; or 
(b) in the case of intoxicati ng drugs, a license for 
the cultivation or collection of the plants from 
which such drugs we re produced; or 
(c) a permit granted by th e Collector in that 
behalf. 
Exceptions. 2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to – 
(a) any intoxicant in the possession of any excise 
officer, common carrier or warehouseman as 
such. 
 3) A licensed vendor shall no t have in his possession 
at any place, other than that authorized by his 
license, any quantity of any intoxicant in excess of 
such quantity as the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi has under section 5 declared to be the limit of sale by retail, except under a permit granted by the 
Collector in that behalf. 
Prohibition and restrictions of 
possession of intoxicants in 
certain cases. 4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
foregoing sub-sections, the Lieutenant Governor 
of Delhi may by notification prohibit the possession of any intoxica nt or restrict such 
possession by such conditions as he may 
 22prescribe. 
Prohibition of possession of 
intoxicant unlawfully manufactured, imported etc. 25. No person shall have in his possession any quantity 
of any intoxicant, knowing the same to have been 
unlawfully imported, transported, manufactured, 
cultivated or collected, or knowing the prescribed 
duty not to have been paid thereon. 
 
C – Sale 
 
Sale of intoxicants. 26. No liquor shall be bottled fo r sale and no intoxicant 
shall be sold, except under the authority and subject 
to the terms and conditions of a license granted in that 
behalf; provided that 
1) a person licensed under sec tion 20 to cultivate the 
hemp plant, may sell wi thout a license those 
portions of the plant from which intoxicating 
drugs can be manufactured, to any person licensed 
under this Act to deal in the same or to any officer whom the Excise Commi ssioner may appoint in 
this behalf; 
2) a person having the right to the tari drawn from 
any tree may sell the same without a license to a 
person licensed to manufa cture or sell tari under 
this Act; 
3) on such condition as the Excise Commissioner 
may determine, a license for sale under the excise law for the time being in force in other parts of 
India may be deemed to be a license granted in 
that behalf under this Act; 
4) nothing in this section ap plies to the sale of any 
foreign liquor procured by any person for his private use and sold by him or on his behalf or on 
behalf of his representative-in-interest upon quitting a station or after his decease. 
Grant of lease of manufacture 
etc. 27. 1) The Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may lease to 
any man not below the age of twenty five years on 
 23such conditions and for such period as he may 
deem fit, the right – 
(i) of manufacturing or of supplying by 
wholesale, or of both, or 
(ii) of selling by wholesale or by retail, or 
(iii) of manufacturing or of supplying by 
wholesale, or of both, and of selling by 
retail, any country liquor or intoxicating 
drug within any specified local area. 
2) The Collector shall gran t to a lessee under subsection (1) a license in the terms of his lease; and, 
when there is no condit ion in the lease which 
prohibits subletting may, on the application of the 
lessee, grant a license to any sub-lessee approved by the Collector. 
Manufacture and sale of 
liquor in Military 
Cantonments. 28. Within the limits of an y military cantonments and 
within such distance from these limits as the Central 
Government in any case ma y prescribe no license for 
the manufacture or sale of liquor and no lease of the 
retail vend of liquor, such as is described in section 
27, shall be granted unless with the consent of the 
Commanding Officer. 
Prohibition of sale to persons 
under the age of twenty five 
years and of women. 29. No licensed vendor and no person in the employ of 
such vendor or acting on his behalf shall sell or 
deliver any liquor or intoxicating drug to any person apparently under the age of twenty-five years whether 
for consumption by such pers on or by another person 
and whether for consumption on or off the premises 
of such vendor. 
Prohibition of employment of 
men under the age of twenty-five years and of women. 30. No person who is licens ed to sell any liquor or 
intoxicating drug for consumption on his premises shall, during the hours in which such premises are 
kept open for business, employ or permit to be 
employed, either with or without remuneration, any 
man under the age of 25 ye ars or any women in any 
part of such premises in which such liquor or 
intoxicating drug is consumed by the public. 
 24 
 25 CHAPTER V 
DUTIES AND FEES 
Duty on excisable articles. 31. An excise duty, or countervailing duty, as the case 
may be at such rate or rates as the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi shall direct, may be imposed, either generally or for any specified local area, on any excisable article- 
(a) imported, exported or transported in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 
16; or 
(b) manufactured or cultivated under any 
license granted unde r section 20; or 
(c) manufactured in any distillery established 
or any distillery or brewery licensed under 
section 21; 
Provided as follows:- 
(i) Duty shall not be so imposed on any article 
which has been imported into (India) and was liable on importation to duty under the 
India Tariff Act, 1894 or the Sea Customs 
Act, 1878; 
(ii) …………………. ……………………… 
Explanation:- Duty may be imposed under this section at different rates according to the places 
to which any excisable article is to be removed 
for consumption or according to the varying 
strengths and quality of such article. 
 26Manner in which duty may be 
levied. 32. Subject to such rules regulating the time, place and 
manner, as the Excise Commissioner may prescribe, such duty shall be levied rateably, on the quantity of excisable article imported, exported, 
transported, collected or manufactured in, or 
issued from a distillery, brewery or warehouse. 
(a) on intoxicating drugs by an average rate 
levied on the cultiv ation on the quantity 
collected; 
(b) on spirit or beer manufactured in any 
distillery established, or any distillery or 
brewery licensed under this Act in 
accordance with such scale of equivalents calculated on the quantity of material used, or by degree of attenua tion of the wash or 
work, as the case may be, as the Lieutenant 
Governor of Delhi may prescribe; 
(c) on tari, by a tax on each tree from which the 
tari is drawn; 
Provided further that, wh ere payment is made upon 
issue of an excisable article for sale from a warehouse established or licensed under Section 
22(a) it shall be made- 
(a) if the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi by 
notification so directs, as the rate of duty 
which was in force at the date of import of 
that article, or 
(b) in the absence of such direction by the 
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi at the rate of 
duty which is in force on that article on the 
date when it is issued from the warehouse. 
 27Payment for grant of leases 33. Instead of or in addition to any duty leviable under 
this chapter the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may accept payment of a sum in consideration of the 
Lease of any right under section 27. 
 33A Omitted. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
LICENSES, PERMITS AND PASSES 
Fees for terms, conditions and 
form of, and duration of licenses, permits and passes, 34. (1) Every license, permit or pass granted under this 
Act shall be granted – 
(a) on payment of such fee, if any, 
(b) subject to the such restrictions and on such 
conditions, 
(c) in such form and containing such 
particulars, 
(d) for such period, as the Excise 
Commissioner may direct. 
Security (2) Any Authority granting a license under this Act 
may require the licensee to give such security for 
the observance of the terms of his license, or to 
make such deposit in leiu of security as such authority may think fit. 
Grant of licenses for sale 35 (1) Subject to the ru les made by the Excise 
Commissioner under the powe rs conferred by this 
Act, the Collector may gran t licenses for the sale of 
 28any intoxicant within his district. 
Ascertainment of public 
opinion. (2) Before any license is granted in any year for the 
retail sale of liquor for consumption on any 
premises which have not been so licensed in the 
preceding year, the Coll ector shall take such 
measures, in accordance wi th rules to be made by 
the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi in this Behalf, as may best enable him to ascertain local public opinion in regard to the licensing of such premises. 
 (3) Omitted. 
Power to cancel or suspend 
licenses etc. 36. Subject to such restrictions as the Lieutenant 
Governor of Delhi may prescribe, the Authority granting any license, permit or pass under this Act 
may cancel or suspend it- 
 (a) if it is transferred or sublet by the holder 
thereof without the permission of the said authority or 
(b) if any duty or fee payable by the holder thereof 
be not duly paid; or 
(c) in the event of any breach by the holder of such 
license, permit or pass or by his servants, or by 
any one acting on his beha lf with his express or 
implied permission of any of the term or 
conditions of such licens e, permit or pass; or 
(d) if the holder thereof is convicted of any offence 
punishable under this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force relating to revenue, or 
for any cognizable and non-bailable offence, or 
any offence punishable under the Dangerous 
Drugs Act, 1930 or under the Merchandise 
Marks Act, 1889 or of any offence punishable 
under Sections 482 to 489 both inclusive of the 
 29Indian Penal Code, 1860. 
(e) If the holder thereof is punished for any offence 
referred to in clause (8) of Section 167 of the Sea Customs Act 1878. 
(f) Where a license, permit or pass has been 
granted on the applicati on of the grantee of a 
lease under this Act, on the requisition in 
writing of such grantee; or 
(g) At will, if conditions of the license or permit 
provide for such cancellation or suspension. 
Power to cancel any other 
license 37. When a license, permit or pass held by any person 
is cancelled under clause (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of 
Section 36, the authority aforesaid may cancel any 
other license, permit or pa ss granted to such person 
by or by the authority of the Lieutenant Governor 
of Delhi within the same di strict under this Act or 
under any other law for the time being in force relating to excise revenue or under the Opium Act, 1878 and the Excise Commissioner, may cancel 
any such license permit or pass granted to such 
person in any district to which this Act applies. 
Power to recover fee. 38. In the case of cancellation or suspension of license 
under clause (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of Section 36 
the fee payable for the balance of the period for which any license would have been current but for 
such cancellation or suspension, may be recovered 
from the ex-licensee as excise revenue. 
Power or Collector to take 
grants under management or to resell. 39. If any holder of a license granted under this Act, or 
any person to whom a leas e has been granted under 
Section 27, makes default in complying with any condition imposed upon him by such license or 
lease, the collector may take the grant under 
management at the risk of the person who has so 
 30defaulted or may resell it any recover in the manner 
laid down in Section 60 of this Act any deficiency 
in price and all expenses of such resale. 
No compensation or refund 
claimable for cancellation or suspension of license, etc; under this section. 40. When a license, permit or pass is cancelled or 
suspended under clause (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of 
Section 36 or under sectio n 37, the holder shall not 
be entitled to any compensa tion for its cancellation 
or suspension nor to be re fund of any fee paid or 
deposit made in respect thereof. 
Power to withdraw licenses. 41. (1) Whenever the authority which granted a 
license, permit or pass unde r this Act considers that 
such license, permit or pass should be withdrawn 
for any cause other than th ose specified in section 
36, it may, on remitting a sum equal to the amount of the fees payable in re spect thereof for fifteen 
days, withdraw the license either- 
(a) on the expiration of fi fteen days notice in 
writing of its intention to do so, or 
(b) forthwith without notice. 
Compensation in the case of 
withdrawal (2) If any licence, perm it or pass be withdrawn 
under clause (b) of sub-s ection (1) in addition to 
the sum remitted as aforesaid, there shall be paid to 
the licencee such further sum (if any) by way of 
compensation as the Excise Commissioner may direct. 
Refund of fee or deposit (3) When a licence, perm it or pass is withdrawn 
under this section, any fe e in advance or deposit 
made by the licensee in respect thereof shall be 
refunded to him, after deducting the amount (if any) due to the Government. 
 31Technical irregularities in 
license etc. 42. (1) No licence, permit or pass granted under this 
Act shall be deemed to be invalid by reason merely 
of any technical defect, irre gularity or omission in 
the license or in any proc eedings taken prior to the 
grant thereof. 
(2) The decision of the Excise Commissioner as to 
what is a technica l defect, irregularity or omission 
shall be final. 
No claim in consequence of 
refusal to renew a license etc. 43. No person to whom a licence, permit or pass may 
have been granted, shall be entitled to claim any 
renewal thereof and no claim shall lie for damages 
or otherwise in conseque nce of any refusal to 
renew a license permit or pass on the expiry of the 
period for which it remains in force. 
Surrender of licence. 44. (1) No holder of a licence granted under this Act to 
sell any intoxicant sh all surrender his licence 
except on the expiration of one month’s notice in 
writing given by him to be Collector of his 
intention to surrender the same and on payment of 
the fee payable for the licensee for the whole period for which it would have been current but for the surrender: 
Provided that, if the Collec tor is satisfied that there 
is sufficient reason for su rrendering the license, he 
may remit to the holder thereof the sum so payable 
on surrender or any portion thereof. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply in the case of 
any licence granted under Section 27(2). 
Explanation:- The words ‘ holder of a Licence’ as 
used in this Section include a person whose tender bid for a licence has been accepted, although he 
may not actually have received to licence. 
 32 
 33CHAPTER VII 
POWER AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS, Etc. 
Power to enter and inspect 
places of manufacture.. and 
sale. 45. Any excise officer not below such rank, as the 
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may prescribe, may- 
(a) enter and inspect, at any ti me by day or by night 
any place in which any licenced manufacturer carries on the manufacture of or stores any (intoxicant); 
(b) enter and inspect at a ny time within the hours 
during which sale is permitted, and at any other 
time during which the same may be open, any 
place in which any intoxica nt is kept for sale by 
any person holding a lice nce under this Act; 
(c) examine accounts and registers, test measures 
or weigh any material, stills, utensils, implements, apparatus or intoxicant found in 
that place; 
(d) seize any accounts, regist ers, measures, weights 
or testing instruments wh ich he has reason to 
believe to be false. 
Powers to excise officers to 
investigate offences 
punishable under this Act. 46. (1) The Lieutenant Go vernor of Delhi may, by 
notification, invest any excise officer, not below the rank of sub-inspector, with the power to investigate an y offence, punishable 
under this Act, committed within the limits of 
the area in which the officer exercises 
jurisdiction. 
(2) Every officer so empowered may, within these 
limits, exercise the same powers in respect of such investigation as an officer in charge of a 
 34police station may exercise in a cognizable 
case under the provisions of Chapter XIV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 
Powers of arrest, seizure 
and detention. 47. Any officer of the exci se, police, salt or land 
revenue departme nt, not below such rank and 
subject to such restrict ions as the Lieutenant 
Governor of Delhi may prescribe, and any other person duly empowered by notification by the 
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi in this behalf, may 
arrest without warrant any person found committing 
an offence punishable unde r Section 61 or Section 
63, and may seize and detain any intoxicant or other article which he has reason to believe to be liable to 
confiscation under this Act or other law for the time 
being in force relating to excise revenue, and may 
detain and search any pe rson upon whom and any 
vessel, raft, vehicle, anim al, package, receptacle or 
covering in or upon which he may have reasonable 
cause to suspect any such article to be. 
Power of a magistrate to 
issue warrant for search or arrest. 48. A magistrate having re ason to believe that an 
offence under Section 61 or 63 has been, is being or 
is likely to be, committed, may – 
(a) issue a warrant for the search of any place in 
which he has reason to believe that any 
2(intoxicant), still, utensi l, implement, apparatus 
or material, in respect of which such offence has 
been, is being, or bis lik ely to be committed, are 
kept or concealed; and 
(b) issue a warrant for the arrest of any person 
whom he has reason to be lieve to have been, to 
be, or to be likely to be, engaged in the commission of any such offence. 
Power of excise officer to 49. (1) Whenever any exci se officer, not below such 
rank as the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may, 
by notification prescribe, has reason to believe 
 35sarch without warrant. that an offence punishable under section 61, 
section 62, section 63 or section 64, has been, 
is being, or is likely to be committed in any 
place, and that a sear ch warrant cannot be 
obtained without afford ing the offender an 
opportunity of escape or of concealing evidence of the offence, he may, at any time, by day or night, enter and search such place. 
Further powers of seizure, 
detention, search and arrest. (2) Every excise officer as aforesaid may seize 
anything found in such place which he has 
reason to believe to be liable to confiscation 
under this act, and may deta in and search and, if 
he thinks proper, arrest any person found in such 
place whom he has reason to believe to be guilty 
of such offence, as aforesaid. 
Powers of excise officers to 
obain information. 49A. (1) Any excise officer, not below such rank as the 
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may, by 
notification prescribe, ma y by order require any 
person to furnish to any specified authority or person any such information in his possession concerning any unlawful import, transport, 
manufacture or possession of any intoxicant, or 
any material, still, utensil, implement, or apparatus, whatsoever, for the purpose of manufacturing any intoxi cant, or any unlawful 
cultivation of any plants from which an 
intoxicating drug can be produced as may be 
specified in the order. 
(2) Any person upon whom an order is served 
under sub-section (1) sh all be bound, in the 
absence of reasonable ex cuse, to furnish correct 
information. 
Procedure relating to 
arrests, searches etc. 50. Save as in this Act ot herwise expressly provided, 
the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898 relating to arrests, detentions in custody, 
searches, summons, warrants of arrest, search 
 36warrants, production of persons arrested and 
investigation of offences shall be held to be 
applicable to all action 
The Punjab Excise Act (1 of 
1914) Taken in these respects under this Act, Provided 
that: 
(1) Any offence under this Act may be 
investigated by an officer empowered under 
section 46 without the order of a magistrate. 
(2) Whenever an excise officer below the rank of 
Collector makes any ar rest, seizure born 
search, he shall, with in twenty-four hours 
thereafter, make a full report of all the particulars of the arrest, seizure or search to 
his immediate official superior, and shall, 
unless bail be accepted under section 73 take or send the person arrested, or the article seized, with all convenient dispatch to a 
magistrate for trial or adjudication. 
Police to aid excise officers. 51. All police officers are re quired to aid the excise 
officers in the due exec ution of this Act upon 
request made by such excise officers. 
Duty of land holders and 
others to give information 52. (a) Every owner or occupi er of land or any building 
and the agent of any ow ner of land or any 
building on which – 
(b) Every lambardar, village headman, village 
accountant, village watchman, village 
policeman and every of ficer employed in the 
collection of the revenue or rent of land on the 
part of Government or the Court of Wards in 
whose village – 
There shall be any manufact ure of illegal important 
or collection of any into xicant not licensed under 
 37this Act, or any unlawful cultivation of any plants 
from which an intoxicating drug can be produced, shall be bound, in the abse nce of reasonable excuse, 
to give notice of the same to a magistrate or to an 
officer of the excise, police or land revenue 
department as soon as the fact comes to his knowledge. 
Duty of officer in-charge of 
police station to take charge of articles seized. 53. Every officer in-charge of a police station shall take 
charge of, and keep in sa fe custody, pending the 
orders of a magistrate or of the Collector or of an 
officer empowered unde r Section 46 (1) to 
investigate the case, all articles seized under this Act which may be delivered to him, and shall allow 
any excise officer who may accompany such 
articles to the police stat ion, or may be deputed for 
the purpose by his superior officer to affix his seal 
to the articles and take samples of and from them. All samples so taken shall also be sealed with the seal of the officer-in-charge of the police station. 
Power to close shops for the 
sake of public peace. 54. (1) The District magistrate or a Sub-Division 
Magistrate, by notice in writing to the licensee, 
may require that any shop in which any 
1(intoxicant) is sold shall be closed at such times 
or for such periods as he may think necessary 
for the preservation of the public peace. 
(2) If a riot or unlawful assembly is apprehended or 
occurs in the vicinity of any such shop, a 
magistrate of any class may require such shop to 
be kept closed for such period as he may think 
necessary. 
 Provided that where any such riot or 
unlawful assembly occurs, the licensee shall, in 
the absence of a magist rate, close his shop 
without any order. 
(3) When any Sub-Divisional Magistrate makes a 
 38direction under sub-section (1) or any 
magistrate makes a dire ction under sub-section 
(2), he shall forthwith inform the Collector of 
his action band his reasons therefore. 
 
 
 39CHAPTER VIII 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Measures, weights & testing 
instruments. 55. Every person who manufacturers or sells any 
intoxicant under a license granted under this Act, 
shall be bound – 
(a) to supply himself with such measures, weights 
and instruments as the Excise Commissioner may prescribe, and to ke ep the same in good 
condition; and 
(b) on the requisition of an y excise officer, duly 
empowered by the Collector in that behalf, at 
any time to measure, weigh or test any intoxicant in his possessi on in such manner as 
the said excise officer may require. 
Powers of Lieutenant 
Governor) to exempt intoxicants from the provisions of the Act. 56. The Lieutenant Govern or of Delhi may, by 
notification, either wholly or partially and subject to 
such conditions as he may think fit to prescribe, 
exempt any intoxicant from all or any of the 
provisions of this Act. 
Bar of certain suits. 57. No suit shall lie in an y civil court against the 
Government or any officer or person for damages for 
any act in good faith done, or ordered to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or of any other law for the time 
being in force relating to the excise revenue. 
Power of Lieutenant 
Governor to make rules. 58. (1) The Lieutenant Go vernor of Delhi may, by 
notification, make rules for the purpose of 
carrying out the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force relating to 
excise revenue. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the 
 40generality of the foregoing provision, the 
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may make rules – 
(a) prescribing the dutie s of excise officers; 
(b) Omitted (c) prescribing the time and manner of presenting 
and the procedure for dealing with, appeals from orders of the excise officers; 
(d) regulating the import, export, transport or 
possession of any intoxicant, or excise bottle 
and the transfer, price or use of any type of 
description of such bottle; 
(e) regulating the period s and localities for which, 
and the persons, or classes of persons to whom licenses, permits and pa sses for the vend by 
wholesale or by retail of any intoxicant may be 
granted and regulating the number of such 
licences which ma y be granted in any local area; 
(f) prescribing the procedure to be followed and the 
matters to be ascertained before any licence is 
granted for the retail vend of liquor for consumption on the premises; 
(g) for the prohibition of th e sale of an intoxicant to 
any person or class of persons; 
(h) Regulating the power of excise officers to 
summon witnesses from a distance; 
(i) Regulating he grant of expenses to witnesses and 
compensation to persons charged with offences 
under this Act and subsequently released, 
 41discharged or acquired; 
(j) for the prohibition of the employment by a 
licence-holder of any person or class of persons to assist in his business in any capacity whatsoever; 
(k) for the prevention of drunkenness, gambling and 
disorderly conduct in or near any licensed 
premises, and the meeting or remaining of 
persons of bad character in such premises; 
(l) prohibiting the printin g, publishing or otherwise 
displaying or distributing any advertisement or other matter commending or soliciting the use of, or offering any intoxicant; and 
(m) prohibiting within the Union Territory of Delhi 
the circulation, distribu tion or sale of any 
newspaper, book, leafle t, booklet, or other 
publication printed and published, outside the 
Union Territory of Delhi which contains any advertisement or matter of the nature described 
in clause(1); 
(n) declaring any newspa per, book, leaflet, booklet 
or other publication, wherever printed or 
published, containing any advertisement or matter commending or soliciting the use of or 
offering any intoxicant, to be forfeited to the 
Government; and 
(o) implementing generally he policy of prohibition.
Previous publication of 
rules. (4) The power conferred by this Section of making 
rules is subject to the co ndition that the rules be 
made after previous publication. 
 42 Provided that any such rules may be made 
without previous publicat ion if the (Lieutenant 
Governor) of Delhi cons iders that they should 
be brought into force at once. 
Powers of Excise 
Commissioner to make 
rules. 59. The Excise Commissioner may, be notification, 
make rules – 
(a) regulating the manufactur e, supply, storage or 
sale of any intoxicant, including:- 
 (i) the character, erection, alteration, repair, 
inspection, supervision, management and 
control of any place for the manufacture, supply, storage, or sale of such article and the fittings, implements, apparatus and registers to 
be maintained therein; 
(ii) the cultivation of the hemp Plant and the 
collection of spontaneous growth of such plant and the preparations of any intoxicating drug; 
(iii) the tapping or drawin g of tari from any tari 
producing tree; 
(b) regulating the bottling of liquor for purposes of 
sale; 
(c) regulating the deposit of any intoxicant in a 
wharehouse and the remova l of any intoxicant 
from any warehouse or from any distillery or 
brewery; 
(d) prescribing the scale of fees or the manner of 
fixing the fees payabl e in respect of any 
license, permit or pass or in respect of the 
storing of any intoxicant; 
 43(e) regulating the time, place and manner of 
payment of any duty or fee; 
(f) prescribing the authorit y by, the restrictions 
under and the conditions on which, any license permit or pass may be granted including 
provision for the following matters:- 
(i) the prohibition of the admixture with any 
(intoxicant) of any su bstance deemed to be 
noxious or objectionable; 
(ii) the regulation or prohibition of the reduction 
of liquor by a licensed manufacturer or licensed vendor from a higher to a lower strength; 
(iii) the fixing of the strength, or price below 
which any intoxicant shall not be sold, 
supplied or possessed; 
(iv) the prohibition of sale of any intoxicant except 
for cash; 
(v) the fixing of the days and hours during which 
any licensed premises ma y or may not be kept 
open, and the closure of such premises on special occasions; 
(vi) the specification of the nature of the premises 
in which any intoxicant may be sold, and the 
notices to be exposed at such premises; 
(vii) the form of the accounts to be maintained and 
the returns to be submit ted by license-holders; 
and 
(viii) the prohibition or regulati on of the transfer of 
 44licenses: 
(g) (i) declaring the process by which spirit shall be 
denatured; 
(ii) for causing spirit to be denatured through 
the agency or under the supervision of its own 
officers; 
(iii) for ascertaining whether such spirit has 
been denatured; 
(h) providing for the destruction or other disposal 
of any intoxicant deemed to be unfit for use; 
(i) regulating the disposal of confiscated articles; 
(j) prescribing the amount of security to be 
deposited by the holder s of leases, licenses, 
permits or passes for th e performance of the 
conditions of the same. 
Recovery of dues, 60. (1) The following moneys namely – 
 (a) all excise revenue, (b) any loss that may accrue, when in 
consequence of default a grant has been taken 
under management by the Collector or had been resold by him under Section 39, and 
 (c) all amounts due to the Government by any 
person on account of any contract relating to the excise revenue, 
May be recovered from the pe rson primarily liable to 
pay the same, or from his su rety (if any), by distress 
 45and sale of his movable pr operty, or by any other 
process for the recovery of arrears of land revenue 
due from land-holders or from farmers of land or their sureties, 
(2) When a grant has been taken under management 
by the Collector or has been resold by him under 
Section 39, the Collecto r may recover in any 
manner authorized by sub-section (1), any money due to the defaulter by any lessee or 
assignee. 
(3) In the event of the defaul t by any person licensed 
or holding a lease under th is Act all his distillery, 
brewery, warehouse or shop, premises, fittings or apparatus and all stocks of (intoxicant) or 
materials for manufacture of the same held in or 
upon premises shall be li able to be attached in 
satisfaction of any claim for excise by revenue or 
in respect of losses incu rred by the Government 
through such default and to be sold to satisfy such claim, which shall be a first charge upon the sale proceeds. 
 
 46CHAPTER IX 
OFFENCES AND PANEALTIES 
Penalty for un-lawful 
import, export, transport, 
manufacture, possession 
etc. 61. (1) Whosoever, in contravention of any Section of 
this Act or of any rule, notification issued or given thereunder or order made, or of any license, permit or pass gr anted under this Act. 
 (a) imports, exports, transports, manufacturers, 
collects or possesses any intoxicant; 
 (b) constructs or works any distillery or 
brewery; or 
 (c) uses, keeps, or has in his possession any 
material, still, utensil, implement or 
apparatus, whatsoever, for the purpose of manufacturing any intoxicant other than tari; shall be punishable for every such offence with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to (t hree years) and with 
fine upto two thousand rupees and if found in possession of a working still for the manufacture of any intoxicant shall be punishable with the minimum sentence of 
six months imprisonment and fine of two 
hundred rupees. 
Penalty for unlawful 
import, export, transport, 
manufacture, possession, 
sale etc. (2) Whosoever, in contrave ntion of any section other 
than sections 29 and 30 of this Act or of any 
rule, notification issued or given thereunder or 
order made, or of any license, permit or pass 
granted under this Act – 
 (b) sells any intoxicant; or 
 47 (c) cultivates the hemp plant, or 
 (d) removes any in toxicant from any distillery, 
brewery or warehouse established or licensed under this Act; or 
 (d) bottles any liquo r for the purpose of sale; or 
 (e) taps or draws tari from any tari-producing 
tree; 
Shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years and fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees. 
It should be noted, moreover, that the 
infliction of a penalty under this chapter does 
not debar the Collector from canceling a license under Secti on 36 or Section 37. 
Section 61(1)*(b) refers to distilleries and 
breweries as the terms are generally understood, large works not as a rule capable 
of concealment. A case might arise of illicit 
distillation being carrie d on, on so large a 
scale as to come under this sub-clause but no such case has so far ar isen, and the sub-clause 
should not be applied to the ordinary illicit 
still found in the Unio n Territory of Delhi, 
which is covered by sub-clause 61 (1)(a) 
Doubt often arises as to whether punishment should 
be asked for under both sub-clauses 61(1)(a) and 
61(1)(c). 
Such cases arise – (1) when a still at work is seized with a quantity of 
 48lahan and of the resultant spirit; 
(2) when illicity distilled spir it and lahan are seized 
without apparatus; 
(3) when apparatus and lahan are seized;’ 
(4) when illicity distilled sp irit and apparatus not at 
work are seized. 
In such cases there is a certain degree of overlapping, 
as (a) covers “manufacture” and (c) covers “use of a 
still” for manufacture. When the offence is 
“manufacture by a still” or otherwise comes within 
the more definite terms of cl ause (c), that clause (c) 
should be used in preferen ce to the more general 
clause (a). In practice in deed, it will not often be 
possible to convict and punish under both subclauses as Section 71, Indi an Penal Code, will come 
into operation. Where the possession of the illicity distilled spirit or of the laha n is really only one part 
of the process of manufact ure, the offender can be 
sentenced only to 3 years, whether he is convicted 
under (a) or (c). 
It is not easy to lay dow n general rules; but if a 
reference is made in each case to Section 71 of the 
Indian Penal Code and Sec tion 35 of the Criminal 
Procedure Code, and care is taken to distinguish between distinct offences and separate offences, i.e., the separable elements in th emselves offences of one 
combined offence no diff iculty should arise. 
Penalty or unlawful selling 
to person under twenty-five years or employing them or women. 62. If any licensed vendor, or any person in his employ 
or acting on his behalf- 
(a) in contravention of Section 29 sells or 
delivers any liquor or intoxicating drug to any person apparently unde r the age of (twenty 
 49five) years; or 
(b) In contravention of Section 30 employs or 
permits to be employed on any part of his 
licensed premises referred to in that Section any man under the age of twenty-five years or 
women; or 
(c) Sells any intoxicant to a person who is drunk 
or intoxicated; or 
(d) Permits drunkenness, in toxication, disorderly 
conduct or gaming on the licensed premises 
of such licensed vendor; or 
(e) Permits any person whom he knows or has 
reason to believe to ha ve been convicted of 
any non bailable offence or any reputed 
prostitute to frequent his licensed premises, 
whether for the purposes of crime or prostitution or not; 
He shall, in addition to any other penalty to which he 
may be liable, be punishab le with a fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees. 
When any licensed vendor or any person in his 
employ or acting on his behalf is charged with 
permitting drunkenness or intoxication on the 
licensed premises of such vendor, and it is proved 
that any person was drunk or intoxicated on such 
premises, it shall lie on the person charged, to prove 
that licensed vendor or the person employed by him 
or acting on his behalf took all reasonable steps for 
preventing drunkenness or intoxication on such 
premises. 
 50Penalty for rendering or 
attempting to render 
denatured spirit 63. Whoever renders or attempts to render fit for human 
consumption any spirit, whether manufactured in India or not, which has been denatured, or has in his 
possession any spirit re ndered fit for human 
consumption in respect of which he knows or has 
reason to believe that an y such attempt has been 
made, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, and with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees 
Penalty for fraud by 
licensed manufacturer or vendor or his servant. 64. If any licensed manufactu rer or licensed vendor or 
person in his employ or acting on his behalf- 
 (a) Sells or keeps, or exposes for sale, as foreign liquor, 
any liquor which he knows or has reason to believe 
to have been manufactured from rectified spirit or 
country liquor; or 
(c) marks any bottle, case, package or other 
receptacle containing liquor so manufactured 
from rectified spirit or country liquor, or the cork of any such bottle, or deals with any bottle, 
case, package or other receptacle containing 
such liquor with the intention of causing it to be believed that such bottle, case, package, or other receptacle contains foreign liquor; 
he shall be punishable wi th imprisonment for a term 
which may extent to three months and with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(Indian made whisky, brandy, and gin are 
manufactured from plain spirit. Thus every distiller who makes these sophisticated spirits is technically guilty of an offence under this section. As, however, the sanction of the Collector is, under s ection 75 of 
the Act, necessary before a prosecution under this 
section can be instituted, th ere is little danger of its 
 51being abused). 
Penalty for certain acts by 
licensee or his servant. 65. Whoever, being the holder of license, permit or pass 
granted under this Act, or being in the employ of 
such holder or acting on his behalf – 
(a) fails willfully to produc e such license, permit 
or pass on the demand of any excise officer or 
of any other officer dul y empowered to make 
such demand; or 
(b) in any cash not provided for in section 61 
willfully contravenes any rule made under 
section 58 or section 59; or 
(c) willfully does or omits to do anything in 
breach of any of the conditions of the license, permit or pass not otherwise provided for in 
this Act; shall be punishable in case (a) with 
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, and in case (b) or case (c) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
Penalty for consumption in 
chemist’s shop etc. 66. 1) If any chemist, druggist, apothecary or keeper of a 
dispensary allows any intoxicant which has not been bonafide medicated for me dicinal purposes to be 
consumed on his business premises by any person 
not employed in his business, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extent to thee months and with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees. 
2) If any person not employed as aforesaid consumes 
any such intoxicant such premises, he shall be 
punishable with a fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
 52Manufacture, sale or 
possession by one person 
on account of another. 67. 1) When any intoxicant has been manufactured or 
sold or is possessed by a ny person on account of any 
other person and such ot her person knows or has 
reason to believe that such manufacture or sale was, 
or that such possession is on his account, the article 
shall for the purpose of this Act be deemed to have 
been manufactured or sold by or to be in the 
possession of such other person. 
2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall absolve any 
person who manufactures, sell s or has poss ession of 
any intoxicant on account of another person from 
liability to any punishment under this Act for the 
unlawful manufacture, sale or possession of such 
article. 
Penalty for offences not 
otherwise provided for. 68. Whoever is guilty of any act or intentional omission 
in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act 
or of any rule, notification or order made, issued or 
given thereunder and not otherwise provided for in 
this Act, shall be punisha ble for every such act or 
omission with a fine which may extent to two hundred rupees. 
 68A. Whoever, having been c onvicted of an offence under 
sub-section (1) of section 61 of this Act, shall be 
guilty of a similar offence, shall be subject for every 
such subsequent offence to twice the sentence of 
imprisonment and fine awarded on previous 
conviction provided that the enhanced punishment 
does not exceed the imprisonment of three years and 
a fine of two thousand rupees; provided that if on a 
previous conviction the sent ence awarded was that of 
fine only, the sentence of imprisonment on 
subsequent conviction shall be in addition to the 
enhanced penalty of fine provided further that the 
enhanced punishment would not in any way affect the minimum sentence prescribed for the offence of possession of a working stil l for the manufacture of 
 53any intoxicant. 
Attempt to commit offences 
punishable under the Act. 69. Whoever attempts to commit or abets any offence 
punishable under this Act shall be liable to the punishment provided for the offence. 
Security for abstaining from 
commission of certain offences. 69A. 1. Whenever any person is convicted of an 
offence punishable under se ctions 61, 63 or 69 
and the court convicting him is of the opinion 
that it is necessary to require such person to 
execute a bond for abstaining from the 
commission of offences punishable under 
these sections, the court may, at the time of 
passing sentence on such person, order him to 
execute a bond for a sum proportionate to his means, with or without sureties for abstaining 
from the commission of such offences during such period not exceeding three years, as it 
thinks fit to fix. 
2. The bond shall be in th e form contained in 
schedule II and the provi sions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure 1898, shall, in so far as 
they are applicable, apply to all matters 
connected with such bond, as if it were a bond 
to keep the peace ordered to be executed 
under section 106 of the said Code. 
3. If the conviction is set aside on appeal or in 
revision, the bond so executed shall become 
void. 
4. An order under this Section may also be made 
by an appellate court, or by the High Court when exercising its po wers of revision. 
Penalty for excise officer 
making vexations search, 70. If an excise officer – 
(a) Vexatiously and unnece ssarily enters or 
 54etc. searches, or causes to be entered or searched, 
any place under colour of exercising any 
power conferred by this Act; 
(b) Vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes the 
moveable property of any person on the 
pretence of seizing or searching for any article 
liable to confiscation under this Act; or 
(c) Vexatiously and unne cessarily searches, 
arrests, or detains any person; or 
(d) Without lawful excuse ceases or refuses to 
perform or withdraws himself from the duties of his office unless expr essly allowed to do so 
in writing by the Collector or unless he shall 
have given to his imme diate superior officer 
two months notice in writing of his intention to do so; 
He shall be liable to impr isonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred ru pees, or with both. 
Report by investigating 
officer for institution of proceedings. 71. If on an investigation by an excise officer, 
empowered under section 46 sub-section (1), it 
appears that there is suffic ient evidence to justify the 
prosecution of the accused, the investigating officer, 
unless he submits the case for the orders of the Collector under section 80, shall submit a report 
which shall for the purposes of section 190 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, be deemed to be a 
police report to a magistrate having jurisdiction to enquire into or try the ca se and empowered to take 
cognizance of offenc e on police report. 
Offences to be bailable 72. All offences punishable under this Act shall be 
bailable within the meaning of the Code of Criminal 
 55Procedure, 1898. 
Provided that the offence of possession of a working 
still for the manufacture of any intoxicant under 
section 61(1) shall be non-bailable. 
Security for appearance in 
case of arrest without warrant. 73. (1) The Lieutenant Governor of Delhi may empower 
any excise officer to grant bail, notwithstanding that such officer is not empo wered under section 46. 
(2) When a person is ar rested under this Act, 
otherwise than on warrant, by a person or officer who 
is not empowered to grant ba il, he shall be produced 
before or forwarded to – 
(a) the nearest excise officer empowered to grant 
bail, or 
(b) the nearest officer in charge of a police station. (3) Whenever any person arrested under this Act, 
otherwise than on a warrant is prepared to give bail, and is arrested by, or produced in accordance with 
sub section (2) before an officer empowered to grant 
bail, he shall be released upon bail, or at the 
discretion of the officer releasing him, on his own 
bond. 
(4) The provisions of sections 499 to 502, 513, 514 
and 515 of the Code of Cr iminal procedure, 1898 
shall apply, so far as may be, in ever case in which 
bail is accepted or a bond taken under, this section, 
 74. Repealed 
Cognizance of Offences 75. (1) No magistrate shall take cognizance of an 
 56offence, punishable- 
(a) Under Section 61 or Section 66, except on his 
own knowledge or suspicion or on the complaint or report of an excise officer, or 
(b) Under section 62, section 63 and section 64 
section 65, Section 68 or Section 70, except on the 
Compliant or report of th e Collector or an excise 
officer authorized by him in that behalf. 
(2) Except with the special sanction of the Lieutenant 
Governor of Delhi, the magistrate shall take 
cognizance of any offence p unishable under this Act, 
unless the prosecution is ins tituted within a year after 
the date on which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed. 
Presumption as to 
commission of offence in 
certain cases. 76. Whenever any person is found in possession of- 
(a) any still, utensil, implement or apparatus 
whatsoever or any part or parts thereof, such 
as are ordinarily used for the manufacture; 
(b) any material which have undergone any 
process towards the manufacture of an 
intoxicant or from which an intoxicant has been manufactured; 
It shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that 
his possession was in contra vention of the provisions 
of this Act. 
Presumption as to 
commission of offence in 
prosecution under Section 63 of the Act. 76A In prosecutions under Se ction 63, it shall be 
presumed without further evidence, until the contrary 
is proved, that the accused person has committed an offence under that Section in respect of any denatured spirit which has been or attempted to be 
 57rendered fit for human consumption. 
Liability of employer for 
offence committed by the 
employee or agent 77. The holder of a licence, permit or pass under this 
Act, as well as the actual offender, shall be liable to 
punishment for any offence punishable under section 
61, section 62, section 63, section 64 or section 65, 
committed by any person in his employ or acting on 
his behalf as if he had himself committed the same, 
unless he shall establish th at all due a nd reasonable 
precautions were exercised by him to prevent the 
commission of such offence; 
Provided that no person, other than the actual 
offender, shall be punished with imprisonment except 
in default of payment on fine. 
Confiscation of articles in 
respect of which offence 
committed. 78. (1) Whenever an offence punishable under this Act 
has been committed- 
(a) every intoxicant or exci se bottle in respect of 
which such offence has been committed together with the contents of such excise bottle, if any 
(b) every still, utensil, implement or apparatus and all 
material in respect of or by means of which such offence has been committed; 
(c) every intoxicant or excise bottle lawfully 
imported, transported manufactured, had in 
possession or sold along wi th, or in addition to, any 
intoxicant or excisable liable to confiscation under clause (a); 
(d) every receptacle, package and covering in which 
any intoxicant or excise bottle material, still, utensil, 
implement or apparatus as aforesaid is or are found 
together with the other contents (if any) of such 
 58receptacle or package, and 
(e) every animal, cart vessel, raft or other 
Conveyance used in carrying such receptacle, package, covering or articles as aforesaid; 
Shall be liable to confiscation. Provided that when it is proved that the receptacles, 
animals or other articles sp ecified in clauses (d) and 
(e) are not the property of offender they shall not be 
liable to confiscation, if the owner thereof establishes 
that he had no reason to believe that such offence 
was being or was likely to be committed. 
When confiscation may be 
ordered (2) When in the trial of any offence punishable under 
this Act the magistrate decide s that anything is liable 
to confiscation under sub section (1), he may order 
confiscation. 
Provided that in lieu of or dering confiscation, he may 
give the owner of the thing liable to be confiscated as 
option to pay such fine as the magistrate thinks fit. 
Further provisions for 
confiscation. 79. When there is reason to believe that an offence under 
this Act has been committed, but the offender is not known or cannot be found and when anything or animal liable to confiscatio n under this Act and not in 
the possession of any person cannot be satisfactorily 
accounted for, the case sh all be enquired into and 
determined by the Collector, who may order confiscation. 
Provided that no such order shall be made until the 
expiration of one month from the date of seizing the 
thing or animal in questio n or without hearing the 
person (if any) claiming any right thereto, and the evidence (if any) which he produces in support of the 
 59claim. 
Provided further, that if the thing in question is liable 
to speedy and natural decay, or if the Collector is of 
opinion that the sale of the thing of animal in question would be for the benefit of its owner, the 
Collector may, at any time, direct it to be sold; and 
the provisions of th is section shall, so far as may be 
apply to the net proc eeds of such sale. 
Power of excise officers to 
compound offences. 80. 1) The Collector may accept from any person who is 
reasonable suspected of having committed an 
offence punishable under section 62, section 65 or 
section 68 of this Act, a sum of money by way of 
composition for such offe nce; and on the payment 
of such sum of money to the Collector, the accused person, if in cust ody, shall be discharged 
and no further proceeding s shall be taken against 
him in respect of such offences. 
2) The cancellation or susp ension of any license, 
permit or pass under section 36(a),(b) and (c) of this Act may be foregone or revoked by and at the sole discretion of the au thority having the power 
to cancel or suspend it on payment by the holder 
of such license, permit or pass of such penalty as 
such authority may fix. 
3) Where any intoxicant has been seized under the 
provisions of this Act, the Collector may, in his 
discretion, at any time before a magistrate has 
passed an order under sect ion 78, sub-section (2), 
release it on receiving payment of the value 
thereof. 
 
 60SCHEDULE (1) 
(See Section 2) 
 
ENACTMENTS REPEALED 
 
Year No. Short Title Extent of repeal, Acts of the Governor General in Council 1863 XVI The Excise (Spi rits) Act, 1863 The Whole 
1894 VIII The Indian Tarriff Act, 1894 Section 6 
1896 XII The Excise Act, 1896 The Whole 
1906 VII The Excise (Amendment) The Whole. 
1. The existing Schedule renumbered as Sc hedule I by the Punjab Excise (East 
Punjab Amendment) Act, 1948, (IX of 1948) Section 9, as extended to the 
Union Territory of Delhi vide Govern ment of India, Ministry of Home 
Affairs notification No. 8/31/49-Judl. Dated the 20th June, 1949. 
 
 61(SCHEDULE II) 
 
Bond to Abstain from the Commissioner of Offences 
Under the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 
 
(See Section 69- A) 
 
 Whereas I, (name) ……… ………………… Son of ………………………. 
(name) caste…………….. inhabitant of (place) …………………………., district 
……………………….. have been called upon to execute a bond to abstain from the 
commission of offences under section 61, 63 and 69 of Punjab Excise Act, I of 1914, 
for the term of …………………………………. (tim e), I hereby bind myself not to 
commit any such offence duri ng the said term, and, in case of my making default 
therein, I hereby bind myse lf to forefeit to the (Gove rnment) the sum of rupees 
………………………………………………… 
Dated this ………………………. Da y of ……………………. 19 
 
(Wherein a Bond with Sureties is to be Executed, Add) 
 
We do hereby declare ourselves su reties for the above named…………. 
……………… that he will abstain from the co mmission of offences under Section 
61,63 and 69 of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914, as in force in the Union Territory of 
Delhi during the said term an d in case of his making defaul t therein, we bind ourselves 
jointly and severally to forefeit to the (Government) the sum of rupees 
…………………………………….. 
 
Dated this ………………………… day of ……………….. 19 
 
 (Signature) 
 
 
 
1. Schedule II added by the Punjab Ex cise (East Punjab Amendment) Act, 
1948 (IX of 1948), Section 9, as exte nded to the Union Territory of Delhi 
vide Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs notification No.8/11/49-Judl. Dated the 20
th June, 1949. 
 
2. Substituted for the word ‘Provincial’ by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 
1950.