1 
 THE PUNJAB LAND -REVENUE ACT, 1887 
________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION S. 
________ 
SECTIONS. 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Title, extent and commencement. 
2. Repeal. 
3. Definitions. 
4. Exclusion of certain land from operation of Act. 
5. Power t o vary limits and alter number of tahsils, districts and divisions. 
CHAPTER II. 
REVENUE -OFFICERS. 
Classes and Powers. 
6. Classes of R evenue -officers. 
7. Financial Commissioner. 
8. Appointment of Commissioners, and Deputy, Assistant and Extra Assistant Commissioners. 
9. Appointment of Tahsildars and Naib -tahsildars. 
10. Powers of Revenue -officers. 
Administrative Control. 
11. Superintendence and control of Revenue -officers. 
12. Power to distribute business and withdraw and transfer cases. 
Appeal, Review and Revision. 
13. Appeals. 
14. Limitation for appeals. 
15. Review by Revenue -officers. 
16. Power to call for, examine and revise proceedings of Revenue -officers. 
Procedure. 
17. Power to make rules as to procedure. 
18. Persons by whom appearances and applications may be made before and to Revenue -officers. 
19. Power of Revenue -officer to s ummon persons. 
20. Mode of service of summons. 
21. Mode of service of notice, order or proclamation or copy thereof. 
22. Mode of making proclamation. 
 
 
2 
 SECTIONS. 
Supplemental Provisions. 
23. Place of sitting. 
24. Holidays. 
25. Discharge of duties of Collector dying or being disabled. 
26. Retention of powers by Revenue -officers on transfer. 
27. Conferment of powers of Revenue -officers. 
CHAPTER III. 
KANUNGOS, ZAILDARS, INAMDARS AND VILLAGE -oFFICERS. 
28. Rules respecting kanungos, zaildars, inamdars and village -officers. 
29. Village -officers’ cess. 
30. Restriction on attachment or assignment of remuneration of kanungos, Zaildars, Inamdar’s and 
village -officers. 
CHAPTER IV 
RECORDS. 
31. Record -of-rights and documents included therein. 
32. Making o r special revision of record- of-rights. 
33. Annual record. 
Procedure for making Records. 
34. Making of that part of the annual record which relates to land- owners, assignees of 
revenue and occupancy, tenants. 
35. Making of that part of the annual record which relates to other persons. 
36. Determination of disputes. 
37. Restrictions on variation of entries in records. 
38. Mutation- fees. 
39. Penalty for neglect to report acquisition of any right referred to in section 34. 
40. Obligation to furnish information necessary for the preparation of records. 
Righ ts of the Government and presumptions with respect thereto and to other matters. 
41. Rights of the Government in mines and minerals. 
42. Presumption as to ownership of forests, quarries and waste -lands. 
43. Compensation for infringement of rights of third parties in exercise of a right of the Government. 
44. Presumption in favour of entries in records -of-rights and annual records. 
45. Suit for declaratory decree by person aggrieved by an entry in a record. 
Supplemental Provisions. 
46. Power to make rules respecting records and other matters connected therewith. 
47. Record -of-rights and annual records for groups of estates. 
 
3 
 
SECTIONS. 
CHAPTER V. 
ASSESSMENT. 
48. Assessment of land -revenue. 
49. Notification of intended re -assessment and instruction s, as to principles of assessment. 
50. Mode of determining assessment. 
51. Announcement of assessment. 
52. Application for re -consideration of assessment. 
53. Confirmation and duration of assessment. 
54. Assessment to remain in force till new assessment takes effect. 
55. Refusal to be liable for assessment an d consequence thereof. 
56. Distribution of the assessment of an estate over the holdings comp rised therein. 
57. Application for amendment of the distribution of an assessment. 
58. Appeals from orders under section s 52 and 57. 
Special Assessments. 
59. Special assessment. 
60. Formation of waste -land into separate estates. 
 CHAPTER VI. 
COLLECTION OF LAND -REVENUE. 
61. Security for payment of land -revenue. 
62. Further security for payment of land -revenue. 
63. Orders to regulate payment of land -revenue. 
64. Rules to regulate collection, remission and suspension of land- revenue. 
65. Costs recoverable as part of arrear. 
66. Certified account to be evidence as to arrear. 
67. Processes for recovery of arrears. 
68. Writ of demand. 
69. Arrest and detention of defaulter. 
70. Distress and sale of moveable property and crops. 
71. Transfer of holding. 
72. Attachment of estate or holding. 
73. Annulment of assessment of estate or holding. 
74. Proclamation of attachment or annulment of assessment, and consequences of the proclamation. 
75. Sale of e state or holding. 
76. Effect of sale on encumbrances. 
77. Proceedings against other immoveable property of defaulter. 
78. Remedies open to person denying his liability for an arrear. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 SECTIONS. 
Procedure in S ales. 
79. Proclamation of sale. 
80. Indemnity to Revenue -officer with respect to contents of proclamation. 
81. Publication of proclamation. 
82. Time and conduct of sale. 
83. Power to postpone sale. 
84. Stay of sale. 
85. Payment of deposit by highest bidder. 
86. Consequences of failure to pay deposit. 
87. Exercise of right of pre -emption. 
88. Time for payment in full. 
89. Procedure in default of payment. 
90. Report of sale to Commissioner. 
91. Application to set aside sale. 
92. Order confirming or setting aside sale. 
93. Refund of purchase -money on setting aside of sale. 
94. Proclamation after po stponement or on re -sale. 
95. On confirmation of sale, possession and certificate to be granted to purchaser. 
96. Proceeds of sale. 
CHAPTER VII. 
RECOVERY OF OTHER DEMANDS BY REVENUE -OFFICERS. 
97. Recovery of certain arrears through Revenue -officer instead of by suit. 
98. Other sums recoverable as arrears of land -revenue. 
99. Application of Chapter VI to sums recoverable under this Chapter. 
CHAPTER VIII. 
SURVEYS AND BOUNDARIES. 
100. Power of Financial Commissio ner to make rules for demarcation of boundaries and erection of 
survey -marks. 
101. Power of Revenue -officers to define boundaries. 
102. Cost of erection and repair of survey -marks. 
103. Recovery of cost incurred by the Government. 
104. Power of Revenue -offices to enter on land for purposes of survey and demarcation. 
105. Surveys for purpose of preparation of records. 
106. Provision of flag holders and chainmen for those surveys. 
107. Professional surveys. 
108. Penalty for destruction, injury or removal of survey -marks. 
109. Report of destruction or remova l of or injury to survey- marks. 
 
 
 
5 
 SECTIONS. 
CHAPTER IX 
PARTITION. 
110. Effect of partitions of estates and tenancies on joint liability for revenue and rent. 
111. Application for partition. 
112. Restrictions and limitations on partition. 
113. Notice of application for partition. 
114. Addition of parties to application. 
115. Absolute disallowance of partition. 
116. Procedure on admission of application. 
117. Disposal of questions as to title in property to be divided. 
118. Disposal of other questions. 
119. Administration of property excluded from partition. 
120. Distribution of revenue and rent after partition. 
121. Instrument of partition. 
122. Delivery of possession s of property allotted on partition. 
123. Affirmation of partition s privately effected. 
124. Power to make rules a s to costs of partition. 
125. Re-distribution of land according to custom. 
126. Officer who may be empowered to act under this Chapter. 
CHAPTER X. 
ARBITRATION. 
127. Power to refer to arbitration. 
128. Order of reference and contents thereof. 
129. Nomination of arbitrators. 
130. Substitution of arbitrators by parties. 
131. Nomination and substitution of arbitrators by Revenue -officers. 
132. Process for appearance before arbitrators. 
133. Award of arbitrators and presentation thereof. 
134. Procedure on presenta tion of award. 
135. Effect of award. 
CHAPTER XI. 
SPECIAL JURISDICTION WITH RESPECT TO LAND. 
136. Power to invest officers making records -of-rights or general re -assessments with power s of Civil 
Courts. 
137. Control ov er such officers and appeals from and revisi on of their decrees and orders. 
 
 
 
6 
 SECTIONS. 
CHAPTER XII. 
SUPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS. 
Revenue Deposits. 
138. Power to deposit certain sums other than rent. 
139. Procedure in case of deposit on account of a payment due to Government. 
140. Procedure in case of other deposits. 
Execution of Orders of Civil and Criminal Courts by Revenue -officers. 
141. Orders of Civil and Criminal Courts for execution of processes against land or the produce 
thereof to be addressed to a Revenue -officer. 
142. Attachment of assigned land- revenue. 
Preservation of attached Produce. 
143. Preservation of attached produce. 
Division of Produce. 
144. Division of produce. 
Miscellaneous. 
145. Village c esses. 
146. Superior land- owners ’ dues. 
147. Substitution of service for payment of land- revenue. 
148. Recovery of cost of assessing assigned land -revenue. 
149. Penalty for failure to attend within limits of estate in obedience to order of Revenue -officers. 
150. Prevention of encroachment on common lands. 
151. Papers kept by village- officers to be deemed public documents. 
152. Costs. 
153. Computation of periods limited for appeals and application s for review. 
154. Restriction on Revenue -officers bidding at auctions or trading. 
155. Power to make rules. 
156. Rules to be made after previous publication. 
157. Power s exerciseable by the Financial Commissioner from time to time. 
Exclusion o f Jurisdiction of Civil Courts. 
158. Exclusion of jurisdiction of Civil Courts, in matters within the jurisdiction of Revenue -officers. 
THE SCHEDULE. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 THE PUNJAB LAND -REVENUE ACT, 1887 
__________ 
ACT NO. XVII OF 1887 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNOR GENERAL OF INDIA IN COUNCIL. 
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 23rd
__________ September, 1887.) 
An Act to amend and declare the Land -revenue Law of the Punjab. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to amend and declare the law in force in the P unjab with respect to the making 
and maintenance of records- of-rights in land, the assessment and collection of land- revenue, and other 
matters relating to land and the liabilities incident thereto; I t is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I. 
PRELIMINARY. 
1. Title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Punjab Land -revenue 
Act, 1887. 
(2) It extends to the territories for the time being administered by the Lieutenant -Governor of the 
Punjab, including the pargana of Spiti, but not so as to affect, otherwise than as expressly provided by this 
Act, any Regulation in force under the provisions of the Statute 33 Victoria, chapter 3, section 1, in any 
portion of those territories; and 
(3) It shall come into force on such day as the Local Gover nmen t, with the previous sanction of the 
Governor General in Council, may by notification appoint in this behalf. 
(4) Any pow er conferred by this Act on the Financial Commissioner to make rules, and on the Local 
Government to sanction them, may be exercised at any time after the passing of this Ad, but a rule so 
made shall not take effect till the commencement of this Act. 
2. Repeal.—(1) The enactments mentioned in the schedule are repealed to the extent specified in the 
third column thereof. 
(2) But all rules, appointments, assessments and transfers made, notifications and proclamations 
issued, authorities and powers conferred, farms and leases granted, records -of-rights and other records 
framed, revised or confirmed, rights acquired, liabilities incurred, time s and places appointed and other 
things done under any of t he repealed enactments shall, so far as may be, be deemed to have been 
respectively made, issued, conf erred, granted, framed, revised, confi rmed, acquired, incurred, appointed 
and done under this A ct. 
 (3) Any enactment or document referring to any enactment hereby repealed shall be construed as 
referring to this Act. 
3. Definitions.—In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, — 
(1) “estate” means any area — 
(a) for which a separate record -of-right has been made; or 
8 
 (b) which has been separately assessed to land -revenue, or would have been so assessed if t he 
land- revenue had not been released, compounded for or redeemed; or 
(c) which the Local Government may, by general rule or special order, declare to be an estate: 
(2) “landowner ” does not include a tenant or an assig nee of land -revenue, but does include a person to 
whom a holding has been trans ferred, or a n estate or holding has been let in farm, under this Act for the 
recovery of an arrear of land -revenue or of a sum recoverable as such an arrear, under every other person 
not here in before in this clause mentioned who is in possession of an estate or any share or portion 
thereof, or in the enjoyment of any part of the profits of an estate: 
(3) “holding” means a share or portion of an estate held by one la ndowner or jointly by two or more 
landowners: 
(4) “rent”, “tenant ”, “landlord” and “tenancy ” have the meani ngs respectively assigned to th ose words 
in the Punjab tenancy Act, 1887 (XVI of 1877): 
(5) “pay”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes, when used with reference 
to rent, “ deliver" and "render ”, with their grammatical variations and cognate expressions: 
(6) “land-revenue ” includes assigned land- revenue and any sum payable in respect of land, by way of 
quit-rent or of commutation for ser vice, to the Government or to a person to whom the Government has 
assigned the right to receive the payment: 
(7) “arrear of land -reven ue” means land -revenue which remains unpaid after the date on which it 
beco mes payable: 
(8) “defaulter” means a person liable for an arrear of land- revenue, and includes a person who is 
responsible as surety for the payment of the arrear: 
(9) “rates and cesses” means rates and ce sses which are primarily payable by landowners, and 
includes — 
(a) the local rate, if any, payable under the Punjab Local Rates Act, 1878 (V of 1878); 
(b) the local rate, if any, payable under the Punjab District Boards Act, 1883 (XX of 1883), and any 
fee leviable under section 33 of that Act from landowners for the use of or benefits derived from such 
works as are referred to in section 20, clauses ( i) and ( j), of that Act; 
(c) any annual rate chargeable on owners of lands under section 59 of the Northern India Canal and 
Drainage Act, 1873 (VIII of 1873); 
(d) the zaildari and village- officers ’ cesses; and 
(e) sums payable on account of village- expenses: 
(10) “village -cess” includes any cess, contribution or due which is customari ly leviable within an 
estate and is neither a payment for the use of private property or for personal service nor imposed by or 
under any enactment for the time being in force: 
(11) “village -officer” means a chief -headman, headman or patwari: 
(12) “Revenue -officer”, in any provision of this Act, means a Revenue, officer having authority under 
this Act to discharge the functions of a Revenue -officer under that provision: 
9 
 (13) “ legal practitioner ” means any legal practitioner with in the meaning of the Legal Practitioners 
Act, 1879 (XVIII of 1879), except a mukhtar: 
(14) “ agricultural year ” means the year commencing on the sixteenth day of June, or on such other 
date as the Local Government may by notification appoint for any local ar ea: 
(15) “notification” means a notification published by authority of the Local Government in the official 
Gazette: 
(16) “ incumbrance ” means a charge upon or claim against land a rising out of a private g rant or 
contract: and 
(17) “survey -mark” includes boundary -mark. 
4. Exclusion of certain land from operation of Act.—(1) Except so far as may be necessary for the 
record, recovery and administration of viIlage -cesses, nothing in this Act applies to land which is 
occupied as the site of a town or village and is not assessed to land -revenue. 
(2) A Revenue -officer may define for the purposes of this Act the limits of any such land. 
5. Power to vary limits and alter number of tahsils, districts and divisions.—The 1ocal 
Government may by notification vary the limits of the tahsils, districts and divisions into which the 
territories administered by it are divided, and may by notification alter the number of those tahsils and, 
with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council, the number of those dist ricts and 
divisions. 
CHAPTER II. 
REVENUE -OFFICERS. 
Classes and Power s. 
6. Classes of Revenue- officers. — (1) There shall be the following classes of Revenue -officers, 
namely — 
(a) the Financial Commissioner; 
(b) the Commissioner; 
(c) the Collector; 
(d) the Assistant Collector of the first gr ade; and 
(e) the Assistant Collector of the second grade. 
(2) The Deputy Commissioner of a district shall be the Collector thereof. 
(3) The Local Government may appoint any Assistant Commissioner, Extra Assistant Commissi oner 
or Tahsildar to be an Assistant Collector of the first or of the second grade, as it thinks fit, and any 
Naib -tahsildar to be an Assistant Collector of the second grade. 
(4) Appointments under sub- section (3) shall be by notif ication, and may be of a person specially by 
name or by virtue of his office or of more persons than one by any description sufficient for their 
identification. 
(5) Subject to the provisions or this Act the jurisdiction of the Commissioner extends to the whole of 
the territories for the time being administered by the Lieutenant- Governor of the Punjab, and of 
10 
 Commissioners and of Collectors and Assistant Collectors to the divisions and districts respectively in 
which they are for the time being employed. 
7. Financia l Commissioner.—(1) There shall he one o r more Financial Commissioners, who shall be 
appointed, and may be removed, by the Local Government with the previous sanction of the Governor 
General in Council. 
(2) Where more Financial Commissioners than one have been appointed, the Local Government may 
make rules as to the distribution among them of business under this or any other Act, and by those rules 
require any case or class or classes of cases to be considered and disposed of by the Financial 
Commissioners collectively. 
(3) When there is a difference of opinion among the Financial Commissioners as to any decree or 
order to be made in a case which they are required by rules under the last foregoing sub- section to 
consider and dispose of collectively, the foll owing rules shall apply, namely: — 
(a) where the case is an appeal or a case on review or revision, it shall be decided 
in accordance with the opinion or the majority of the Financial Commissioners, or, if there is no such majority which concurs in a decision modifying or reversing the decree or order under appeal, review or revision, that decree or order shall be affirmed: and 
(b) where the case is not an appeal or a case on review or revision, the matter respecting which 
there is the difference of opinion shall be referred to the Local Government for decision, and the 
decision of that Government with respect thereto shall be final. 
(4) The expression “Financial Commissioner ” in this or any other Act shall, when there are m ore 
Financial Commissioners than one, be construed as meaning one or more of the Financial 
Commissioner s as the rules for the time being in force under sub -section ( 2) may require. 
(5) The second Financial Commissioner appointed under section 52 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1884 
(XVIII of 1884), shall be deemed to have had jurisdiction on and after the first Day of November, 1884, 
to make any decree or order or dispose of any other business which might have been made or disposed of by the other Financial Com missioner. 
8. Appointment of Commissioners, and of Deputy, Assistant and Extra Assistant 
Commissioners.—Commissioners, Deputy Commissioners, Assistant Commissioners and Extra 
Assistant Commissioners shall be appointed and may be removed by the Local Gover nment. 
9. Appointment of Tahsildars and Naib -tahsildars.—The Lo cal Government shall fix the number of 
Tahsildars and Naib -tahsildars to be appointed, and the Financial Commissioner may make rules for their 
appointment and removal. 
10. Powers of Revenue -officers. —Except where the class of the Revenue -officer by whom any 
function is to be discharged is specified in this Act, the Local Government may by notification determine 
the functions to be discharged under this Act by any class of Revenue -officers. 
Administrative Control. 
11. Superintendence and control of Revenue- officers. —(1) The Financial Commissioner shall be 
subject to the control of the Local Government. 
(2) The general superintendence and control over all other Revenue -officers shall be vested in, and all 
such officers shall be subordinate to, the Financial Commissioner. 
(3) Subject to the general s uperintendence and control of the Financial Commissioner, a 
Commissioner shall control all other Revenue- officers in his division. 
11 
 (4) Subject as aforesaid and to the control of the Commissioner, a Collector shall control all other 
Revenue -officers in his district. 
12. Power to distribute business and withdraw and transfer cases.—(1) The Financial 
Commissioner or a Commissioner or Collector may by written order distribute, in such manner as he 
thinks fit, any business cognizable by any Revenue -officer under his control. 
(2) The Financial Commissioner or a Commissioner or Collector may withdraw any case pending 
before any Revenue -officer under his control, and either dispose of it himself, or by written order refer it 
for disposal to any other Revenue -officer under his control. 
(3) An order under sub- section ( 1) or sub- section ( 2) shall not empower any officer to exercise any 
powers or deal with any business which he would not be competent to exercise or deal with within the 
local limits of his own jurisdiction. 
Appeal, Review and Revision. 
13. Appeals.—Save as otherwise provided by this Act, an appeal shall lie form an original or appellate 
order of a Revenue -officer as follows, namely: — 
(a) to the Collector when the order is made by an Assistant Collector of either grade; 
(b) to the Commissioner when the order is made by a Collector; 
(c) to the Financial Commissioner when the order is made by a Commissioner. 
Provided that — 
(i) when an original order is confirmed on first appeal, a further appeal shall not lie; 
(ii) when any such order is modified or reversed on appeal by the Collector, the order made by the 
Commissioner on further appeal, if any, to him shall be final. 
14. Limitation for appeals.—Save as otherwise provided by this Act, the period of limitation for an 
appeal under the last foregoing section shall run from the date of the order appealed against, and shall be 
as follows, that is to say:- 
(a) When the appeal lies to the Collector —thirty days. 
(b) when the appeal lies to the Commissioner —sixty days; 
(c) when the appeal lies to the Financial Commissioner —ninety days. 
15. Review by Revenue officers.— (1) A Revenue -officer may, either of his own motion or on the 
application of any party interested, review, and on so reviewing modify, reverse or confirm, any order 
passed by himself or by any of his predecessors in office: 
Provided as follows: — 
(a) when a C ommissioner or Collector thinks it necessary to review any order which he has not 
himself passed, and when a Revenue -officer of a class below that of Collector proposes to review any 
order, whether passed by himself or by any of his predecessors in office, he shall first obtain the 
sanction of the Revenue -officer to whose control he is immediately subject; 
(b) an application for review of an order shall not be entertained unless it is made within ninety 
days from the passing of the order, or unless the applicant satisfies the Revenue -officer that he had 
sufficient cause for not making the application within that period; 
(c) an order shall not be modified or reversed unless reasonable notice has been given to the parties 
affected thereby to appear and be heard in support of the order; 
(d) an order against which an appeal has been preferred shall not be reviewed. 
12 
 (2) For the purposes of this section, the Collector shall be deemed to be the successor in office of any 
Revenue -officer of a lower class who has left the district or has ceased to exercise powers as a 
Revenue -officer and to whom there is no successor in office. 
(3) An appeal shall not lie from an order refusing to review or confirming on review a previous order. 
16. Power to call for, examine and revise proceedings of Revenue -officer. —(1) The Financial 
Commissioner may at any time call for the record of any case pending before, or disposed of by, any 
Revenue -officer subordinate to him. 
(2) A Commissioner or Collector may call for the record of any case pending before, or disposed of 
by, any Revenue -officer under his control. 
(3) If in any case in which a Commissioner or Collector has called for a record he is of opinion that the 
proceedings taken or order made should be modified or reversed, he shall report the case with his opinion 
thereon for the orders of the Financial Commissioner. 
(4) The Financial Commissioner may in any case called for by himself under sub section ( 1) or 
reported to him under sub- section ( 3) pass such order as he thinks fit: 
Provided that he shall not under this section pass an order reversing or modifying any proceeding or 
order subordinate Revenue officer and affecting any questi on of right between private per sons without 
giving tho se persons an opportunity of being heard. 
Procedure. 
17. Power to make Rules as to procedure.—(1) the Local Governm ent may make rules consistent 
with this Act for regulating the procedure of Revenue -officers under this Act in cases in which a 
procedure is not prescribed by this Act. 
(2) The rules may provide, among other matters, for the mode of enforcing orders of ejectment from, 
and delivery of possession of, immovable property, and rules providing for those matters may confer on a 
Revenue -officer all or any of the powers in regard to contempts, resistance and the like which a Civil 
Court may exercise in the execution of' a decree whereby it has adjudged ejectment from, or delivery of 
possession of, such proper ty. 
(3) Subject to the rules under this section, a Revenue -officer may refer any case which he is 
empowered to dispose of under this Act to another Revenue -officer for investigation and report, and may 
decide the case upon the report. 
18. Persons by whom appearances and appl ications may be made before and to Revenueofficers.— (1) Appearances before a Revenue -officer, and applications to and acts to be done before him, 
under this Act may be made or done — 
(a) by the parties themselves, or 
(b) by their recognized agents or a legal practitioner: 
Provided that the employment of a recognized agent or legal practitioner shall not excuse the personal 
attendance of a party to any proceeding in any case in which personal attendance is specially requ ired by 
an order of the officer. 
13 
 (2) For the purposes of sub- section ( 1), recognized agents shall be such persons as the Local 
Government may by notification declare in this behalf. 
(3) The fees of a legal practitioner shall not be allowed as costs in an y proceeding before a 
Revenue -officer under this Act unless that officer considers, for reasons to be recorded by him in writing, 
that the fees should be allowed. 
19. Power of Revenue -officer to summon persons. —(1) A Revenue -officer may summon any 
person whose attendance he considers necessary for the purpose of any business before him as a 
Revenue -officer. 
(2) A person so summoned shall be bound to appear at the time and place mentioned in the summons 
in person or, if the summons so allows, by his recognized agent or a legal practitioner. 
(3) The person at tending in obedience to the sum mons shall be bound to state the truth upon any 
matter respecting which he is examined or makes statements, and to pr oduce su ch docum ents and ot her 
things relating to any such matter as the Revenue -officer m ay require. 
20. Mode of service of summons.— (1) A summons issued by a Revenue -officer shall, if practicable, 
be served ( a) personally on the person to whom it is addressed, or failing him on (b) his recognized agent 
or (c) an adult male member of his family usually residing with him. 
(2) If service cannot be so made, or if acceptance of service so be made is refused, the summons may 
be served by positing a copy thereof at the usual or last known place of residence of the person to whom it 
is addressed, or, if that person does not reside in the district in which the Revenue -officer is employed and 
the case to which the summons relates has reference to land in that district, then by posting a copy of the 
summons on some conspicuous place in or near the estate wherein the land is situate. 
(3) If the summons relates to a case in which persons having the same interest are so numerous that 
personal service on all of them is not reasonably practica ble, it may, if the Revenue -officer so directs, be 
served by delivery of a copy thereof to such of those persons as the Revenue -officer nominates in this 
behalf and by proclamation of the co ntents thereof for the inform ation of the other persons interested. 
(4) A summons may, if the Revenue -officer so directs, be served on the person named therein, either 
in addition to, or in substitution for, any other mode of service, by forwarding the summons by post in a 
letter addressed to the person and registered under Part III of the Indian Post Office Act, 1866 (X IV of 
1866). 
(5) When a summons is so forwarded in a letter and it is proved that the letter was properly addressed 
and duly posted and registered, the Revenue -officer may presume that the summons was served at the 
time when the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post. 
21. Mode of service of notice, order or proclamation or copy thereof.—A notice, order or 
proclamation, or copy of any such document, issued by a Revenue -officer for servi ce of any person shall 
be served in the manner provided in the last foregoing section for the service of a summons. 
22. Mode of making proclamation.—When a proclamation relating to any land is issued by a 
Revenue -officer, it shall, in addition to any othe r mode of publication which may be prescribed in any 
provision of this Act, be made by beat of drum or other customary method, and by the posting of a copy thereof on a conspicuous place in or near the land to which it relates. 
14 
 Supplemental Provisions. 
23. Place of sitting.—(1) An Assistant Collector may exercise his powers under this Act at any place 
within the limits of the district in which he is employed. 
(2) Any other Revenue -officer may only exercise his power s under this Act within the local limits of 
his jurisdiction. 
24. Holidays.—(1) The Financial Commissioner, with the approval of the Local Government, shall 
publish in the local official Gazette before the commencement of each calendar year a list of days to be 
observed in that year as holidays by all or any Revenue -officers. 
(2) A proceeding had before a Revenue -officer on a day specified in the list as a day to be observed by 
him as a holiday shall not be invalid by reason only of its having been had on that day. 
25. Discharge of duties of Collector dying or being disabled.—When a Collector dies or is disabled 
from performing his duties, the officer who succeeds temporarily to the chief executive administration of 
the district under any order which may be generally or specially issued by the L ocal Government in this 
behalf shall be deemed to be a Collector under this Act. 
26. Retention of p owers by Revenue -officer on transfer.—When a Revenue -officer of any class 
who has been invested under the foregoing provisions of this Act with any powers to be exercised in any local area is transferred from that local area to another as a Revenue -officer of the same or a higher class, 
he shall continue to exercise those powers in that other local area unless the Local Government otherwise 
directs or has ot herwise directed. 
27. Conferment of powers of Revenue -officer. —(1) The Local Government may by notification 
confer on any person— 
(a) all or any of the powers of a Financial Commissioner, Commissioner or Collector under this 
Act, or 
(b) all or any of the powers with which an Assistant Collector may be invested thereunder 
 and may by notification withdraw any powers so conferred. 
(2) A person on whom powers are conferred under sub- section ( 1) shall exercise those powers within 
such local limits and in such classes of cases as the Local Government may direct, and, except as 
otherwise directed by the l ocal Government, shall for all purposes connected with the exercise thereof be 
deemed to be a Financial Commissioner, Commissioner, Collector or Assistant Collec tor, as the case 
may be. 
(3) If any of the powers of a Collector under this Act are conferred on an Assistant Collector, they 
shall, unless the Local Government by special order otherwise directs, be exercised by him subject to the 
control of the Co llector. 
CHAPTER III. 
K
ANUNGOS, ZAILDARS, INAMDARS AND VILLAGE -OFFICERS. 
28. Rules respecting Kanungos, zaildars, inamdars and village -officers. —(1) The Financial 
Commissioner may make rules to regulate the appointment, duties, emoluments, punishment, suspension 
and removal of Kanungos, Zaildars, inamdars and village -officers. 
15 
 (2) Rules under sub- section ( 1) may direct that the emoluments of a zaildar, inamdar or village- officer 
shall be such a percentage payable out of the land- revenue as may be prescr ibed by the rules, and that, 
where the land -revenue has been released, compounded for or redeemed, the percentage shall be a charge 
payable by the person who would be liable for the land- revenue if it had not been released compounded 
for or redeemed. 
29. Village -officers’ cess. —(1) The Local Government may by notification impose on any estates, or 
on all or any local area, a cess, to be called the village -officers’ cess, at a rate not exceeding one a nna for 
every rupee of the annual value, for remunerating village -officers and for defraying other expenditure 
directly connected with the supervision of those officers or with the performance of their duties. 
(2) “Annual value ” in the last for egoing sub-section has the meaning assigned to that e xpression in the 
Punjab District Board Act, 1883 (XX of 1883). 
(3) The Finan cial Commissioner may make rule for the c ollection, control and expenditure of the 
village -officers’ cess. 
(4) All cesses now levied in any local area for the purposes mentioned in sub-section ( 1) shall be 
deemed to have been lawfully imposed and shall, until the village- officers’ cess is imposed in that local 
area under that sub- section, be deemed to be lawfully leviable and, for the purposes of this section, to be 
that cess. 
30. R estriction on attachment or assignment of remuneration of kanungos, Zaildars, inamdars 
and village -officers.—( 1) The emoluments of a Kanungo, Zaildar, inamdar or village -officers shall not 
be liable to attachment in execution of a decree or order of any Ci vil or Revenue Court. 
 (2) An assignment of or charge on, or an agreement to assign or charge, any such emoluments shall be 
void unless it is authorized by rules made by the Financial Commissioner in this behalf. 
CHAPTER IV. 
RECORDS. 
Records- of-rights and Annual Records. 
31. Record -of-rights and documents included therein. —(1) Save as otherwise provided by this 
Chapter, there shall be record -of-rights for each estate. 
(2) The record -of-rights for an estate shall include the following documents, namely: — 
 (a) statements showing, so far as may be practicable: — 
(i) the persons who are landowners, tenants or assignees of land -revenue in the estate, or who 
are entitled to receive any of the rents, profits or produce of the estate or to occupy land therein; 
(ii) the nature and extent of the interests of those persons, and the conditions and liabilities 
attaching thereto; and 
(iii) the rent, land- revenue, rates, cesses or other payments due from and to each of those 
persons and to the Government; 
(b) a statement of customs respecting rights and liabilities in the estate; 
(c) a map of the estate; and 
16 
 (d) such other documents as the Financial Commissioner may, with the pervious sanction of the 
Local Government, prescribe. 
32. Making or special revision o f record -of-rights.—(1) When it appears to the Local Government 
that a record -of-right s for an estate does not exist, or that the existing record -of-rights for an estate 
requires special revision, the Local Government may by notification direct that a record- of-rights be made 
or that the record- of-rights be specially revised, as the case may be. 
(2) The notification may direct that records -of-rights shall be made or specially revised for all or any 
estates in any local area. 
(3) A record -of-rights made or sp ecially revised for an estate under this section shall be deemed to be 
the record -of-rights for the estate, but shall not affect any presumption in favour of the Government which 
has already arisen from any previous record -of-rights. 
33. Annual Records.—(1) The Collector shall cause to be prepared by the patwari of each estate 
yearly, or at such other intervals as the Financial Commissioner may prescribe, an edition of the 
record -of-rights amended in accordance with the provisions of this C hapter. 
(2) This edition of the record- of-rights shall be called the annual record for the estate, and shall 
comprise the statements mentioned in sub -section ( 2), clause ( a), of section 31 and such other documents, 
if any, as the Financial Commissioner may, with the previous sanction of the Local Government, 
prescribe. 
(3) For the purposes of the preparation of the annual record, the Collector shall cause to be kept up by 
the patwari of each estate a register of mutations and such other registers as the F inancial Commissioner 
may p rescribe. 
Procedure for making Records. 
34. Making of that part of the annual record which relates to land- owners, assignees of revenue 
and occupancy -tenants.—(1) Any person acquiring, by inheritance, purchase, mortgage, gift or 
otherwise, any right in an estate as a landowner, assignee of land -revenue or tenant having a right of 
occupancy, shall report his acquisition of the right to the patwari of the estate. 
(2) If the person acquiring the right is a minor or otherwise disquali fied, his guardian or other person 
having charge of his property shall make the report to the patwari. 
(3) The patwari shall enter in his register of mutations every report made to him under sub- section ( 1) 
or sub- section ( 2), and shall also make an entry therein respecting the acquisition of any such right as 
aforesaid which he has reason to believe to have taken place, and of which a report should have been 
made to him under one or other of those sub- sections and has not been so made. 
(4) A Revenue -office r shall from time to time inquire into the correctness of all entries in the register 
of mutations and into all such acquisitions as aforesaid coming to his knowledge of which, under the foregoing sub -sections, report should have been made to the patwari and entry made in that register, and 
shall in each case make such order as he thinks fit with respect to the entry in the annual record of the 
right acquired. 
17 
 (5) Such an entry shall be made by the insertion in that record of a description of the right acqu ired 
and by the omission from that record of any entry in any record previously prepared which by reason of 
the acquisition has ceased to be correct. 
35. Making of that part of the annual record which relates to other persons.—The acquisition of 
any intere st in land other than a right refered to in sub- section ( 1) of t he last foregoing section shall, — 
(a) if it is undisputed, be recorded by the patwari in such manner as the Financial Commissioner 
may by rul es, in this behalf prescribe; and, 
(b) if it is disputed, be entered by the patwari in the register of mutations and dealt with in the 
manner prescribed in sub- sections ( 4) and ( 5) of the last foregoing section. 
36. Determination of disputes. —(1) If during the making, revision or preparation of any record or in 
the course of any inquiry under this Chapter a dispute arises as to any matter of which an entry is to be 
made in a record or in a register of mutations, a Revenue -officer may of his own motion, or on the 
application of any party interested, but s ubject to the provisions of the next following section, and after 
such inquiry as he thinks fit, determine the entry to be made as to that matter. 
(2) If any such dispute the Revenue -officer is unable to satisfy himself as to which of the parties 
thereto i s in possession of any property to which the dispute relates, he shall ascertain by summary 
inquiry who is the person best entitled to the property, and shall by order direct that that person be put in 
possession thereof, and that an entry in accordance wi th that order be made in the record or register. 
(3) A direction of a Revenue -officer under sub- section ( 2) shall be subject to any decree or order 
which may be subsequently passed by any Court of competent jurisdiction. 
37. Restrictions on variations of entries in records.—Entries in record s-of-rights or in annual 
records, except entries made in annual records by Patwaris under clause ( a) of section 35 with respect to 
undisputed acquisitions of interest referred to in that section, shall not be varied in subsequent records 
otherwise than by — 
(a) making entries in accordance with facts proved or admitted to have occurred; 
(b) making such entries as are agreed to by all the parties interested therein or are support ed by a 
decree or order binding on those parties; 
(c) making new maps where it is necessary to make them. 
38 Mutation fees.—(1) The Local Government may fix a scale of fees for all or any classes of entries 
in any record or register under this Chapter and for copies of any such entries. 
(2) A fee in respect of any entry shall be payable by the person in whose favour the entry is made. 
39. Penalty for neglect to report acquisition of any right referred to in section.—Any person 
neglecting to make the report required by section 34 within three months from the date of his acquisition 
of a right referred to in that section shall be liable, at the discretion of the Collector, to a fine not exceeding five times the amount of the fee which would have been payable according to the scale fixed 
under the last foregoing section if the acquisition of the right had been reported immediately after its accrual. 
18 
 40. Obligation to publish information necessary for the preparation of records.—Any person 
whose rights, interes ts or liabilities are required to be entered in any record under this Chapter shall be 
bound to furnish, on the requisition of any Revenue -officer or village -officer engaged in compiling the 
record, all information necessary for the correct compilation thereof. 
Rights of the Government and presumptions with respect thereto and to other matters. 
41. Right of the Government in mines and minerals.—All mines of metal and coal, and all earth -oil 
and gold washing shall be deemed to be the property of the Governme nt for the purposes of the State and 
the State Government shall have all powers necessa ry for the proper enjoyment of the Government’s right 
thereto. 
42 Presumption as to ownership of forests, quarries and waste -lands.—(1) When in any record- ofrights completed before the eighteenth day of November, 1871, it is not expressly provided that any 
forest, quarry, unclaimed, unoccupied, deserted or wasteland, spontaneous produce or other accessory 
interest in land belongs to the landowners, it shall be presum ed to belong to the Government. 
(2) W hen in any record- of-rights completed after the date it is not expressly provided that any forest or 
quarry or any such land or interest belongs to the Government, it shall be presumed to belong to the 
landowners. 
(3) The presumption created by sub- section ( 1) may be rebutted by showing — 
(a) from the records or report made by the assessing officer at the time of assessment, or 
(b) if the record or report is silent, then from a comparison between the assessment of villages in 
which there existed, and the assessment of villages of similar character in which there did not exist, any forest or quarry, or any such land or interest, that the forest, quarry, land or interest was taken into 
account in the assessment of the land -revenue. 
(4) Until the presumption is so rebutted, the forest, quarry, land or interest shall be held to belong to 
the Government. 
43. Compensation for infringement of rights of third parties in exercise of a right of the 
Government.—(1) Whenever, in the exercise of any right of the Government referred to in either of the 
two last foregoing sections, the rights of any person are infringed by the occupation or disturbance of the 
surface of any land, the Government shall pay, or cause to be paid, to that pe rson compensation for the 
infringement. 
(2) The compensation shall be determined as nearly as may be in accordance with the provisions of the 
Land Acquisition Act, 1870 (X of 1870). 
44. Presumption in favour of entries in Records -of-rights and annual recor ds.—An entry made in 
a record -of-rights in accordance with the law for the time being in force, or in an annual record in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the rules thereunder, shall be presumed to be true until the contrary is proved or a new entry is lawfully substituted therefor. 
45. Suit for dec laratory decree by persons, aggrieved by an entry in a record.—If any person 
considers himself aggrieved as to any right of which he is in the possession by an entry in a 
record-of-rights or in an annual record, he may institute a suit for a declaration of his right under Chapter 
VI of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (I of 1877). 
19 
 Supplemental Provisions. 
46. Power to make rules respecting records and other matters connected therewith.—The 
Financial Commissioner may make rules.— 
(a) prescribing the language in which records and registers under this Chapter are to be made; 
(b) prescribing the form of those records and registers, and the manner in which they are to be 
prepared, signed and attested; 
(c) for the survey of land so far as may be necessary for the preparation and correction of those 
records and registers; 
(d) for the conduct of inquiries by Revenue -officers under this Chapter; and 
(e) generally for the guidance of R evenue -officers and village -officers in matters pertaining to 
records and registers mentioned or referred to in this Chapter. 
 47. Records -of-rights and annual records for groups of estates.— (1) The Financial Commissioner 
may direct that a record -of-right s be made for any group of neighboring estates instead of separately for 
each of the estates. 
(2) The provisions of this Chapter with respect to a record -of-rights and annual record for and estate 
shall then, so far as they can be made applicable, apply t o a record- of-rights and annual record for a group 
of estates. 
________ 
CHAPTER V. 
ASSESSMENT. 
48. Assessment of land revenue.— (1) All land, to whatever purpos e applied and wher ever situate, is 
liable to the payment of land -revenue to the Government, except such land as has been wholly exempted 
from that liability by special contract with the Government or by the provisions of any law for the time 
being in force. 
(2) Land -revenue may be assessed in cash or in kind, or partly in cash and partly in kind, as the Local 
Government may direct. 
(3) Land may be assessed to land -revenue notwithstanding that that revenue, by reason of its having 
been assigned, released compounded for or redeemed is not payable to the Government. 
General Assessments. 
49. Notification of intended re -assessment and instructions as to principles of assessment.—(1) A 
general re- assessment of the land -revenue of a district or tahsil shall not be undertaken without the 
previous sanction of the Governor General in Council and notification of that sanction. 
(2) In granting the sanction the Governor General in Council may prescribe such principles of 
assessment and give such other instructions as he thinks fit. 
50. Mode of determining assessment.—(1) The assessment shall be made by a Revenue -officer. 
20 
 (2) Before making it that officer shall report his proposed method of assessment for the sanction of the 
Financial Commissioner in such form as the Financial Commissioner, with the previous sanction of the 
Local Government, may prescribe. 
51. Announcement of assessment.—(1) When the Revenue -officer has obtained the sanction of the 
Financial Commissioner to his proposed method of assessment, he shall make an order determining the assessment proper for each estate and announce it in such manner as the Local Government may prescribe. 
(2) At the time of Announcing the assessme nt he shall also declare the date from which it is to take 
effect, and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, it shall take effect accordingly. 
52. Application for reconsideration of assessment.—(1) The landowner may, within thirty days 
from the da te of the announcement of the assessment, present a petition to the Revenue -officer for a 
reconsideration of the amount, form or conditions of the assessment. 
(2) Where the land -revenue is assigned, the assignee thereof may wit hin thirty days from that dat e 
present a like petition to the Revenue -officer. 
(3) The order passed by the Revenue -officer on the petition shall set forth his reasons for granting or 
refusing it. 
53. Confirmation and duration of assessment.—(1) An assessment of the land -revenue of a district 
or tahsil shall not be considered final until it has been confirmed by the Local Government. 
(2) At any time before an assessment is so confirmed the Commissioner or Financial Commissioner 
may modify the assessment of any estate in the district or tahsil. 
(3) The Local Government shall, when confirming an assessment under sub- section ( 1), fix the period 
for which the assessment is to be in force. 
54. Assessment to remain in force till new assessment takes effect. —Notwithstanding the 
expiration of the period fixed for the continuance of an assessment under sub -section ( 3) of the last 
foregoing section, the assessment shall remain in force till a new assessment takes effect. 
55. Refusal to be liable for asse ssment and consequences thereof. —(1) At any time within ninety 
days from the date of the announcement of an assessment the landowner or, where there are more 
landowners than one, any of them who would be individually or collectively liable for more than ha lf the 
sum assessed may give notice to the Revenue -officer of refusal to be liable for the assessment. 
 (2) When the Revenue -officer receives a notice under sub -section ( 1), the Collector may take 
possession of the estate and deal with it, as nearly as may be, as if the annulment of the assessment 
thereof had been ordered as a process for the recovery of an arrear of land -revenue due thereon. 
(3) While the estate is in the possession of the Collector, the landowner or landowners shall be entitled 
to receive from the Government an allowance, to be fixed by the Financial Commissioner, which shall not be less than five or more than ten per cent. of the net income realized by the Government from the estate. 
56. Distribution of the assessment of an estate over th e holdings comprised therein.—(1) If the 
assessment announced under section 51 is in whole or in part a fixed assessment of an estate for a term of years, the Revenue -officer shall, before the date on which the first installment thereof becomes payable, 
21 
 make an order distributing it over the several holdings comprised in the estate and make and publish 
a record of the distribution. 
 (2) The Collector may for sufficient reason make an order revising that record at any time while the 
assessment continues to be in force, and publish the record so revised. 
(3) If the assessment announced under section 51 is in the form of rates chargeable according to the 
results of each year or harvest, a Revenue -officer shall from year to year or from harvest to h arvest, as the 
conditions of the assessment may require, make and publish, not later than one month before the first 
installment of the land -revenue falls due, a record of the amount payable in respect of each holding. 
(4) The Financial Commissioner may make rules for the guidance of Revenue- officers in making, 
publishing and revising records under this section. 
57. Application for amendment of the distribution of an assessment.—(1) Any person affected by 
a record made under su b-section ( 1) or sub- section ( 3) of the last foregoing section, or by the revision of a 
record under sub- section (2 ) of that section, may, within thirty days from the date of the publication of the 
record, present a petition to the Revenue -officer for a re -consideration of the record so far as it affects 
him. 
(2) The order passed by the Revenue -officer on the petition shall set forth reasons for granting or 
refusing it. 
58. Appeals from orders under sections 52 and 57. —An appeal from an order under the last 
foregoing section or section 52 shall lie to the Commissioner, and from the appellate order of the 
Commissioner to the Financial Commissioner. 
Special Assessments. 
59. Special assessments. —(1) Special assessment may be made by Revenue -officers in the foll owing 
cases, namely 
(a) when estates are formed under the next following section; 
(b) when lands -revenue which has been released or assigned is resumed; 
(c) when the waste -lands are sold, leased or granted by the Government; 
(d) when the assessment of any land has been annulled or the landowner has refused to be liable 
therefor, and the term for which the land was to be managed by the Collector or his agent or let in farm 
has expired; 
(e) when assessments of land -revenue require revision in consequence of the action of water or 
sand or of calamity of season or from any other cause; 
(f) when revenue due to the Government on account or pasture or oth er natural products of land, or 
on account of mills, fisheries or natural products of water, or on account of other rights described in section 41 or section 42, has not been included in an assessment made under the foregoing provision 
of this Chapter. 
(2) The Financial Commissioner may make rules for the guidance of Revenue- officers in making 
special assessments, and may confirm such assessments. 
22 
 (3) The foregoing provisions of this Chapter with respect to general assessments shall, subject to such 
modifications thereof as the Fina ncial Commissioner may prescribe by rules under the last foregoing 
sub-section, regulate the procedure of Revenue -officers making special assessments. 
60. Formation of waste -land into separate estate. —(1) When in the opinion of the Collector or of an 
officer making a general re- assessment of land- revenue under the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, 
the waste- land belonging to or adjoining an estate is so extensive as to exceed the requirements of the 
owners of the estate with reference to pasturage or other useful purpose, the Collector or officer may at 
any time, with the previous sanction of the Financial Commissioner, make a separate assessment of the 
waste- land which he considers to be so in excess, and offer that land at that assessment, for such term and 
on such conditions as he thinks fit, to the owners of the estate to which it belongs, and, if they refuse the 
offer, to the owners of any estate which the land adjoins, and, if they also refuse the offer, to any other person. 
(2) When the o wners of the estate to which the waste- land belongs refuse the offer, the Collector shall 
assign to them an annual allowance not less than five and not more than ten per cent. of the net income 
realized by the Government form the land. 
CHAPTER VI. 
C
OLLECTION OF LAND-REVENUE. 
61. Security for paym ent of land- revenue. —(1) In the case of every estate, the entire estate and the 
landowner or, if there are more than one, the land owners jointly or severally shall be liable for the 
land- revenue for the time being assessed on the estate: 
Provided that — 
(a) the Local Government, with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council, may by 
notification declare that in any estate a holding or its owner shall not be liable for any part of the landrevenue for the time being assessed on the estate except that part which is payable in respect of the 
holding; and 
(b) when there superior and inferior landowners in the same estate, the Financial Commissioner 
may by rule, or by special order in each case, determine weather the superior or inferior landowners 
shall be liable for the land -revenue, or weather both shall be so liable and, if so, in what proportions. 
(2) A notification under proviso ( a) to sub- section ( 1) may have reference to any single esta te or to any 
class of estates or estates generally in any local area. 
62. Further security for payment of land -revenue.—( 1) The land- revenue for the time being 
assessed on an estate or payable in respect of a holding shall be th e first charge upon the rent s, and 
produce thereof. 
(2) Without the previous consent of the Collector, the rents, profits or produce of an estate or holding 
shall not be liable to be taken in execution of a decree or order of any Court until the land- revenue 
chargeable against the rents, profits or produce, and any arrear of land -revenue due in respect of the estate 
or holding, have been paid. 
23 
 63. Orders to regulate payment of land -revenue.— (1) Notwithstanding anything in any record- ofrights, the Financial Commissioner may fix the number and amount of the installments, and the times, 
places and manner, by, at and in which land- revenue is to be paid. 
(2) Until the Financial Commissioner otherwise directs, land-revenue shall be payable by the 
installments, at the times and places and in the manner by, at and in which it is payable at the 
commencement of this Act. 
64. Rules to regulate collection, remission and suspension of land -revenue. —(1) The Financial 
Commissioner may make rules consistent with this Act to regulate the collection, remission and 
suspension of land- revenue, and may by those rules determine the circumstances and terms in and on 
which assigned land revenue may, be collected by the assignee; 
(2) Where land -revenue due to an assignee is collected by a Revenue -officer, there shall be deducted 
from the sum collected such a percentage on account of the cost of collection as the Financial 
commissioner may by rule in this behalf prescribe. 
(3) A su it for an arrear of assigned land -revenue shall not be entertained unless there is annexed to the 
plaint at the time of the presentation thereof a document under the hand of the Collector specially authorizing the institution of the suit. 
65. Costs recover able as part of arrear. —The costs of any process issued under this Chapter shall be 
recoverable as part of the arrear of land -revenue in respect of which the process was issued. 
66. Certified account to be evidence as to arrear. —A statement of account cert ified by a Revenue officer shall be conclusive proof of the existence of an arrear of land- revenue, of its amount and of the 
person who is the defaulter. 
67. Processes for recovery of arrears. —Subject to the other provisions of this Act, an arrear of 
land- revenue may be recovered by any one or more of the following processes, namely: — 
(a) by service of writ of demand on the defaulter; 
(b) by arrest and detention of his person; 
(c) by distress and sale of his movable property and uncut or u ngathered crops; 
(d) by transfer of the holding in respect of which the arrear is due; 
(e) by attachment of the estate or holding in respect of which the arrear is due; 
(f) by annulment of the assessment of that estate or holding; 
(g) by sale of that estate or holding; 
(h) by proceeding against other immovable property of the defaulter. 
68. Writ of demand. —A writ of demand may be issued by a Revenue -officer on or after the day 
following that on which an arrear of land- revenue accrues. 
69. Arrest and detent ion of defaulter. —(1) At any time after an arrear of land -revenue has accrued a 
Revenue -officer may issue a warrant directing an officer named therein to arrest the defaulter and bring 
him before the Revenue -officer. 
24 
 (2) When the defaulter is brought before the Revenue -officer, the Revenue -officer may cause him to 
be taken before the Collector, or may keep him under personal restraint for a period not exceeding ten 
days and then, if the arrear is still unpaid, cause him to be taken before the Collector. 
(3) When the defaulter is brought before the Collector, the Collector may issue an order to the officer 
in charge of the civil jail of the district, directing him to confine the defaulter in the jail for such period, not exceeding one month from the date of the order, as the Collector thinks fit. 
(4) The process of arrest and detention shall not be executed against a defaulter who is a female, 
a minor, a lunatic or idiot. 
70. Distress and sale of move able property and crops. —(1) At any time after an arrear of 
land- revenue has accrued, the moveable property and uncut or un -gathered crops of the defaulter may be 
distrained and sold by order of a Revenue -officer. 
(2) The distress and same shall be conducted, as nearly as may be, in accordance with the law for the 
time being enforced for the attachment and sale of moveable property under the decree of a Revenue 
Court constituted under the Punjab T enancy Act, 1887 (XVI of 1887): 
Provided that, in addition to the particulars exempted by that law from liability to sale, so much of the 
produce of the land of the defaulter as the Collector things necessary for seed -grain and for the 
subsistence, until the harvest next following, of the defaulter and his family, and of any cattle exempted by that law, shall be exempted from sale under this section. 
71. Transfer of holding. —(1) At any time after an arrear of land -revenue has accrued on a holding, 
the Collector may transfer the holding to any person being a landowner of the estate in which t he holding 
is situate and not being a defaulter in respect of his own holding, on condition of hi s paying the arrear 
before being put in possession of the holding, and on such further conditions as the Collector may see fit 
to prescribe. 
(2) The transfer may, as the collector thinks fit, be either till the end of the agricultural year in which 
the de faulter pays to the transferee the amount of the arrear which the transferee paid before being put in 
possession of the holding, or for a term not exceeding fifteen years from the commencement of the 
agricultural year next following the date of the transfe r. 
(3) The Collector shall report to the Financial Commissioner any transfer made by him under this 
section, and the Financial Commissioner may set aside the transfer or alter the conditions thereof, or pass 
such other order as he thinks fit. 
(4) A transf er under this section shall not affect the joint and several liability of the landowners of the 
estate in which it is enforced. 
(5) In respect of all rights and liabilities arising under this Act the person to whom the holding is 
transferred shall, subject to the conditions of the transfer, stand in the same position as that in which the 
defaulter would have stood if the holding had not been transferred. 
(6) When the transfer was for a term, the holding shall, on the expiration of the term, be restored by 
the Collector to the defaulter free of any claim on the part of the Government or the transferee for any arrear of land -revenue or rates and cesses due in respect thereof. 
25 
 72. Attachment of estate or holding.—( 1) At any time after an arrear of land -revenue has accrued, 
the Collector may cause the estate or holding in respect of which the arrear is due to be attached and taken 
under his own management or that of an agent appointed by him for that purpose. 
(2) The Collector or the agent shall be bound by all the engagements which existed between the 
defaulter and his tenants, if any, and shall be entitled to manage the land and to receive all rents and profits accruing therefrom to the exclusion of the defaulter until the arrear has been satisfied, or until the Collector restores the land to the defaulter. 
(3) All surplus profits of the land attached beyond the cost of attachment and management and the 
amount necessary to meet the current demand for land -revenue and rates and cesses shall be applied in 
dischar ge of the arrear. 
(4) Land shall not be attached for the same arrear for a longer term than five years from the 
commencement of the agricultural year next following the date of the attachment, but, if the arrear is 
sooner discharged, the land shall be rele ased and the surplus, receipts, if any, made over to the 
landowner. 
73. Annulment of assessment of estate of holding.—(1) When an arrear of land -revenue has been 
due for a longer period than one month, and the foregoing processes are no t deemed sufficient for the 
recovery thereof, the financial Commissioner may, in addition to or instead of all or any of those 
processes, order the existing assessment of the estate or holding in respect of which the arrear is due to be annulled. 
(2) The provisions of this section shall not be put in force for the recovery of an arrear of land -revenue 
which has accrued on land — 
(a) while under attachment under the last foregoing section, or 
(b) while under the charge of the Court of Wards. 
(3) When the assessment of any land has been annulled, the Collector may, with the previous sanction 
of the Financial Commissioner, either manage the land himself or through an agent, or let it in farm to any person willing to accept the farm, for such term and on such conditions as may be sanctioned by the 
Financial Commissioner: 
Provided that the term for which land may be so managed or farmed shall not be longer than fifteen 
years from the commencement of the agricultural year next following the date of t he annulment. 
(4) at some time before the expiration of that term the Collector shall determine the assessment to be 
paid in respect of the estate or holding for the remainder of the term of the current assessment of the 
district or tehsil, and, when that assessment has been sanctioned by the Financial Commissioner, shall 
announce it to the landowner. 
(5) The landowner may give notice to the Collector of refusal to be liable for the assessment within 
thirty days from the date on which the assessment was ann ounced to him. 
(6) If notice is so given, the Collector may, with the previous sanction of the Financial Commissioner, 
take the estate or holding under direct management or farm it for the remainder of the term of the current assessment of the district or tehsil, or for any period within that term which the Financial Commissioner 
may fix. 
26 
 (7) When the assessment of a holding is annulled, the joint responsibility of the other landowners of 
the estate for the land -revenue of that holding becoming due after the annulment shall be in abeyance 
until the a new assessment takes effect. 
(8) The Financial Commissioner may direct that any contract made by the defaulter, or by any person 
through whom the defaulter claims, with respect to any land comprised in an est ate or holding of which 
the assessment has been annulled shall not be binding on the Collector or his agent or farmer during the 
period for which the estate or holding remains under the management of the Collector or his agent or is let 
in farm. 
74. Procla mation of attachment or annulment of assessment and consequence of the 
proclamation.—(1) When any land is attached under section 72, or when the assessment of any land has 
been annulled under the last foregoing section, the Collector shall make proclamation thereof. 
 (2) No payment made by any person to the defaulter before the making of the proclamation on 
account of rent or any other asset in anticipation of the usual time for the payment shall, without the 
special sanction of the Collector, be credited t o that person or relieve him from liability to make the 
payment to the Collector or his agent or farmer. 
 (3) No payment made after the making of the proclamation on account of rent or any other asset of the 
estate or holding to any person other than the C ollector or his agent or farmer shall be credited to the 
person making the payment or relieve him from liability to make the payment to the Collector or his agent or farmer. 
75. Sale of estate or holding.— When an arrear of land -revenue has accrued and the foregoing 
processes are not deemed sufficient for the recovery thereof, the Collector, with the previous sanction of 
the Financial Commissioner, may, in addition to, or instead of, all or any of those processes, and subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, sell the estate or holding in respect of which the arrear is due: 
Provided that land shall not be sold for the recovery of — 
(a) any arrear which has accrued while the land was under the charge of the Court of Wards, or was 
so circumstanced that t he Court of Wards might have exercised jurisdiction over it under the 
provisions of section 35 of the Punjab Laws Act, 1872, (IV of 1872) clause ( a), (b), (c) or (d); or 
(b) any arrear which has accrued while the land was under attachment under section 72 of this 
Act; or 
(c) any arrear which has accrued while the land was held under direct management by the Collector 
or in farm by any other person, under section 73, after either an annulment of assessment or a refusal 
to be liable therefor. 
76. Effect of sale on incumbrances. —(1) Land sold under the last foregoing section shall be sold free 
of all incumbrances; and all grants and contracts previousl y made by any person other than purchaser in 
respect of the land shall become void as against the purchaser at the sale. 
(2) Nothing in sub- section ( 1) shall affect — 
(a) a tenant’s right of occupancy, unless the right was creat ed by the defaulter himself, or 
27 
 (b) any lease at fair rent, temporary or perpetual, for the erection of a dwelling -house or 
manufactory, or for a mine, garden, tank, canal, place of wor ship, or burial ground, so long as the land 
continues to be used for the purpose specified in the le ase, or 
(c) any incumbrance, grant, contract or right of occupancy specially saved by order of the Financial 
Commissioner and proclaimed as hereinafter provided. 
77. Proceedings against other immovable property of defaulter.—( 1) If the arrear cannot be 
recovered by any of the processes hereinbefore provided, or if the Financial Commissioner considers the 
enforcement of any of those processes to be inexpedient, the Collector may, where the defaulter owns any 
other estate or holding, or any other immovable property, proceed under the provisions of this Act against that property as if it were the land in res pect of which the arrear is due: 
Provided that no interest save those of t he defaulter alone shall be so proceeded against, and no 
incumbrances created, grants made or contracts entered into by him in good faith shall be rendered invalid 
by reason only of his interests being proceeded against. 
(2) When the Collector determines to proceed under this section against im movable property other 
than the land in respect of which the arrear is due, he shall issue a proclamation prohibiting the transfer or 
charging of the property. 
(3) The Collector may at any time by order in writing withdraw the proclamation, and it shall be 
deemed to be withdrawn when either the arrear has been paid or the interests of the defaulter in the property have been sold for the recovery of the arrear. 
(4) Any private alienation of the property, or of any interest of the defaulter therein, whether by sale, 
gift, mortgage or otherwise, made after the issue of the proclamation and before the withdrawal thereof 
shall be void. 
(5) In proceedings against property under this section the Collector shall follow, as nearly as the nature 
of the property will admit, the procedure prescribed for the enforcement of process against land on which 
an arrear of land -revenue is due. 
78. Remedies open to person denying his liability for an arrear.— (1) Notwithstanding anything in 
section 66, when proceedings are taken under this Act for the recovery of an arrear, the person against 
whom the proceedings are taken may, if he denies his liability for the arrear or any part thereof and pays 
the same under protest made in writing at the time of payment and signed by him or his agent, institute a 
suit in a Civil Court for the recovery of the amount so paid. 
(2) A suit under sub- section ( 1) must be instituted in a Court having jurisdiction in the place where the 
office of the Collector of the district in which the arrear or some part thereof accrued is situate. 
Procedure in Sales. 
79. Proclamation of sales.—(1) On the receipt of the sanction of the Financial Commissioner to the 
sale of any immovable property, the Collector shall issue a proclamation of the intended sale, specifying – 
(a) the date, time and place of the sale; 
(b) the property to be sold, and, if it is an estate or holding, the land- revenue assessed thereon or 
payable in respect thereof; 
28 
 (c) if the property is to be sold for the recovery of an arrear due in res pect thereof, the 
incumbrances, grants, contracts and rights of occupancy, if any, specially saved by order of the 
Financial Commissioner under section 76, sub- section ( 2), clause ( c); 
(d) if the property is to be sold otherwise than for the recovery of an arrear due in respect thereof 
any incumbrance, grant or contract to which the property is known to be liable; and 
(e) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is ordered. 
(2) The proclamation shall also state that any person intending to claim a rig ht of pre -emption must, on 
pain of forfeiting the right, give notice of his intention to the Collect or on an office -day before that fixed 
for the sale. 
(3) The place of sale specified under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) must be either the office of the 
Collector or some place appointed by the Collector in this behalf and situate in or near the property to be 
sold. 
80. Indemnity to Revenue -officer with respect to contents of proclamation. —A Revenue -officer 
shall not be answerable for any error, mis- statemen t or omission in any proclamation under the last 
foregoing section, unless the same has been committed or made dishonestly. 
81. Publication of proclamation.— (1) A copy of the proclamation shall be served on the defaulter 
and be posted in a conspicuous part of the office of the Tahsildar of the tahsil in which the property is to 
be sold is situate. 
(2) After a copy of the proclamation has been served on the defaulter and posted in the office of the 
Tahsildar, a copy thereof shall be posted in the office of the Collector. 
(3) The proclamation shall be further published in manner prescribed in section 22 and in such other 
manner as the Collector thinks expedient. 
82. Time and conduct of sale.—(1) The sale shall not take place on a Sunday or other holiday, or till 
after the expiration of at least thirty days from the date on which the copy of the proclamation was posted in the office of the Collector. 
(2) The sale shall be by public auction and shall be conducted either by the Collector in person or by a 
Reve nue-officer specially appointed by him in this behalf. 
83. Power to postpone sale.— The Collector may from time to time postpone the sale. 
84. Stay of sale.—If at any time before the bidding at the auction is completed the defaulter pays the 
arrears in respect of which the property has been proclaimed for sale, together with the costs incurred for 
the recovery thereof, to the officer conducting the sale, or proves to the satisfaction of that officer that he 
has already paid the same either at the place and in the manner prescribed under section 63 or into the 
Government treasury, the sale shall be stayed. 
85. Payment of deposit by highest bidder.—When the highest bid at the auction has been ascertained 
the person who made that bid shall, on the requisition of the officer conducting the sale, pay to that officer 
a deposit of twenty- five per centum on the amount of his bid, and shall, on payment thereof, be declared 
to be the purchaser subject to the provisions of this Chapter with respect to the exercise of a ny right of 
pre-emption. 
29 
 86. Consequences of failure to pay deposit. —If the person who made the highest bid fails to pay the 
deposit as required by the last foregoing section, the property shall forthwith be put up again and sol d, an d 
all expenses attending the first sale, and the deficiency of price, if any, which may happen on the resale, 
may be recovered from him by the Collector as if the same were an arrear of land -revenue. 
87. Exercise of right of pre- emption.—(1) At any time before the close of the day on which the s ale 
takes place any person who h as given notice of his intention to claim a right of pre -emption under 
section 79, sub- section ( 2), may, on payment to the officer conducting the sale of a deposit of t wenty -five 
per centum on the highest bid made at the sale, claim to take the property at that bid. 
(2) If the right is not disputed, he shall be declared to be the purchaser. 
(3) If the right is disputed, the Collector shall inquire into and decide the d ispute and declare the 
purchaser, and his decision and declaration shall be final. 
88. Time for payment in full.— The full amount of the purchaser -money shall be paid by the 
purchaser before the close of the fifteenth day from that on which the purchaser w as declared. 
89. Procedure in default of payment. —In default of payment of the full amount of the purchase money within the period mentioned in the last foregoing section, the deposit referred to in section 85 or 
section 87, as the case may be, shall, after defraying the expenses of the sale, be forfeited to the 
Government and may, if the Collector, with the previous sanction of the Commissioner, so dir ects, be 
applied in reduction of the arrear, and the property shall be re -sold, and the defaulting pur chaser shall 
have no claim to the property or to any part of the sum for which it may subsequently be sold. 
90. Report of sale to Commissioner.—Every sale of immov eable property under this Chapter shall 
be reported by the Collector to the Commissioner. 
91. Application to set aside sale.— (1) At any time within thirty days from the date of sale, 
application may be made to the Commissioner to set aside the sale on the ground of some material 
irregularity or mistake in publishing or conducting it. 
(2) But a sa le shall not be set aside on that ground unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner that he has sustained substantial injury by reason of the irregularity or mistake. 
92. Order confirming or setting aside sale. —(1) After the expirat ion of thirty days from the date of 
the sale, if such application as is mentioned in the last foregoing section has not been made, or if such 
application has been made and rejected, the Commissioner shall make an order confirming the sale, and, if such application has been made and allowed, the Commissioner shall make an order setting aside the 
sale. 
(2) An order made under this section shall be final. 
93. Refund of purchase money on setting aside of sale. —Whenever the sale of any property is set 
aside, the purchaser shall be entitl ed to receive back his purchase- money. 
94. Proclamation after postponement or on re -sale.—A sale made after a postponement under 
section 83, and a re -sale consequent on a purchaser’s default under section 89 or on the setting aside of a 
sale under section 92, shall be made after the issue of a fresh proclamation in the manner herein before 
prescribed for the sale. 
30 
 95. On confirmation of sale, possession and certificate to be granted to purchaser. —(1) After a 
sale has been confirmed in manner aforesaid, the Collector shall put the person declared to be the 
purchaser into possession of the property sold, and shall grant him a certificate to the effect that he has 
purchased that property. 
(2) The certificate shall state whether or not t he property was sold for the recovery of an arrear due in 
respect thereof, and if it was so sold, shall set forth the incumbrances, grants, contracts and rights of 
occupancy, if any, specified in the proclamation of the sale as specially saved by order of the Financial 
Commissioner under section 76, sub- section (2), clause (c). 
(3) The certificate shall be deemed to be a valid transfer of the property but need not to be registered 
as a conveyance. 
(4) Any suit brought in any Court against the certified purchaser on the ground that the purchase was 
made on behalf of a person other than the certified purchaser shall be dismissed with costs. 
(5) The certified purchaser of any immovable property shall be entitled to all rents and profits falling 
due in respe ct of the property after the date of the confirmation of the sa le and be liable for all instalments 
of land- revenue and rates and cesses falling due in respect thereof after that date. 
96. Proceeds of sale. —(1) When a sale of immov eable property under this Chapter has been 
confirmed, the proceeds of the sale shall be applied in the first place to the payment of any arrears, 
including costs incurred for the recovery thereof, due to the Government from the defaulter at the date of 
the confirmation of the sale, whether the arrears are of land -revenue, or of sums recoverable as arrears of 
land- revenue, and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person whose property has been sold, or, if the 
property sold was owned by more than one person, then to the owners either collectively or according to 
the amount of their recorded interests, as the Collector thinks fit. 
(2) The surplus shall not, except under an order of a Court, be paid to any creditor of a person whose 
property has been sold. 
(3) If the proceeds of the sale fall short of such arrears as are referred to in sub -section ( 1), the balance 
remaining due from the defaulter may be recovered from him by further proceedings under this Chapter 
or by any other means authorized by law. 
CHAPTER VII 
RECOVERY OF OTHER DEMANDS BY REVENUE -OFFICERS. 
97. Recovery of certain arrears through Revenue officer instead of suit. —When a village- officer 
required by rules under section 28 to collect any land- revenue or sum recoverable as an arrear of land revenue satisfies a Revenue -officer that the revenue or sums has fallen due and has not been paid to him, 
the Revenue -officer may, subject to any rules which the Financial Commissioner may make in this behalf, 
recover it is if it were an arrear of land -revenue. 
98. Other sums recoverable as arrears of L and-revenue. —In addition to any sums recoverable as 
arrears of land -revenue under this Act or any other enactment for the time being in force, the following 
sums may be so recovered, namely: — 
(a) fees, fines, costs and other charges, including the village -officers’ cess, payable under this Act; 
31 
 (b) revenue due to the Government on account of pasture or other natural products of land, or on 
account of mills, fisheries or natural products of water, or on account of other rights described in 
section 41 or section 42 in cases in which the revenue so due has not been included in the assessment of 
an estate; 
(c) fees payable to district boards or local boards under section 33 of the Punjab Districts Boards 
Act, 1 883 (XX of 1883), for the use of or benefits derived from such works as are referred to in section 
20, clauses ( i) and (j), of that Act; 
(d) sums leviable by or under the authority of the Government as water -rates, or on account of the 
maintenance or management of canals, embankments or other irrigation -works, not being sums 
recoverable as arrears of land -revenue under any enactment for the time being in force; and 
(e) Sums payable to the Government by a person who is surety for the payment of any of the foregoing 
sums or of any other sum recoverable as an arrear of land -revenue. 
99. Application of Chapter VI to sums recoverable under this Chapter. —(1) The provisions of 
Chapter VI shall, with respect to any sum mentioned or referred to in this Chapter, apply, so far as they 
can be made applicable, as if the sum were an arrear of land -revenue and the person from whom, either as 
principal or as surety, it is due were a defaulter in respect of such an arrear. 
(2) Unless any such sum is declared by an y enactment for the time being in force to be recoverable as 
if it were an arrear of land -revenue due in respect of the land charged therewith, the provisions of 
section 77 shall apply under sub- section ( 1) to the recovery thereof. 
________ 
CHAPTER VIII. 
SURVEYS AND BOUNDARIES. 
100. Power of Financial Commissioner to make rules for demarcation of boundaries and 
erection of survey -marks.—(1) The Financial Commissioner may make rules as to the manner in which 
the boundaries of all or any estat es in any local area are to be demarcated and as to the survey -marks to be 
erected within those estates. 
(2) Rules under this section may prescribe, among other matters, the forms of survey- marks and the 
material to be used in their construction. 
101 Power of Revenue -officers to define boundaries. —(1) A Revenue -officer may, for the purpose 
of framing any record or making any assessment under this Act, or on the application of any person 
interested, define the limits of any estate, or of any holding, field or other portion of an estate, and may, 
for the purpose of indicating those limits, require survey -marks to be erected or repaired. 
(2) In defining the limits of any land under sub -section ( 1), the R evenue -officer may cause 
survey-marks to be erected on any boundary already determined by, or by order of, any Court, 
Revenue -officer or Forest settlement -officer, or restore any survey -marks already set up by, or by order 
of, any Court or any such officer. 
102. C ost of erection and repair of survey -marks.—Subject to any rules which the Financial 
Commissioner may make in this behalf, survey -marks shall be erected and kept in repair by or at the cost 
of the persons interested in the land for the indication of the limits of which they are required: 
32 
 Provided that the Local Government may in any case direct that the cost of erection shall be borne by 
the Government or be paid out of the proceeds of the village -officers’ cess. 
103. Recovery of cost incurred by the Government. —(1) If the persons interested in the land fail to 
erect or repair a survey -mark within thirty days from the date of their being required by a Revenue -officer 
to do so, the R evenue -officer may cause it to be erected or repaired. 
(2) Where the Revenue -officer causes a survey -mark to be erected or repaired, he shall, subject to any 
rules or direction under the last foregoing section, apportion the cost amongst the persons interested in the 
land in such manner as he deems just, and certify the same to the Collector. 
(3) The Collector may recover the cost as if it were an arrear of land -revenue. 
104. Power of Revenue -officers to enter o n land for purposes of survey and demarcation. —Any 
Revenue -officer, and any person acting under the orders of a Revenue -officer, may, in the discharge of 
any duty under this Act, enter upon and survey land and erect survey- marks thereon and demarcate the 
boundaries thereof, and do all other acts necessary for the proper performance of that duty. 
105. Survey for purpose of preparation of records. —(1) When any land is being surveyed in 
pursuance of rules under section 46, clause ( c), any Revenue -officer direc ting the survey may, by notice 
or proclamation, require all persons having rights or interests in the land to indicate, within a specified 
time, by temporary marks of a kind to be described in the notice or proclamation, the limits of those rights 
or inter ests. 
(2) If a person to whom the notice or proclamation is addressed fails to comply with the requisition, he 
shall be liable at the discretion of the Revenue -officer to fine, which may extend to ten rupees. 
106. Provision of flagholders and chai men for those surveys. —(1) For the purposes of the survey of 
any land in pursuance of rules under section 46, clause ( c), the land- owner s shall be bound to provide fit 
persons to act as flag holders and chainmen. 
(2) If the land -owners fail to provide such persons or to provide them in sufficient number, such other 
persons as a Revenue -officer considers necessary may be employed and the cost of employing them 
recovered from the land -owners as if it were an arrear of land -revenue. 
107. Professional surveys.—( 1) If i t is necessary to make a survey by other agency than that of 
Revenue -officers or village- officers, the Local Government may publish a notification stating — 
(a) the local area to be surveyed and the nature of the survey; 
(b) the names or official designati ons of the officers by whom the survey is to be made; and 
(c) the kind of survey- marks to be erected by those officers. 
(2) From the date of the notification the officers specified therein, and the persons acting under their 
orders, shall have for the purp oses of the survey the powers conferred on Revenue -officers by 
section 104. 
108. Penalty for destruction, injury or removal of survey -marks. —(1) If any person willfully 
destroys or injures or without lawful authority removes a survey -mark lawfully erected, he may be 
ordered by a Revenue -officer to pay such fine not exceeding fifty rupees for each mark so destroyed, 
injured or removed as may, in the opinion of the Revenue -officer, be necessary to defray the expense of 
33 
 restoring the same and of rewarding the person, if any, who gave information of the destruction, injury or 
removal. 
(2) The imposition of a fine under this section shall not bar a prosecution under section 434 of the 
Indian Penal Code. 
109. Report of destruction or removal of or injury to survey -marks. —Every village -officer of an 
estate shall be legally bound to furnish a Revenue -officer with information respecting the destruction or 
removal of, or any injury done to, any survey- mark lawfully erected in the estate. 
________ 
CHAP TER IX. 
PARTITION. 
110. Effect of partitions of estates and tenancies on joint liability for revenue and rent. —(1) A 
partition of land, either under this Chapter or otherwise, shall not, without the express consent of the 
Financial Commissioner, affect the joint liability of the land or of the land- owners thereof for the revenue 
payable in respect of the land, or operate to create a new e state, and, if any conditions are attached to that 
consent, those conditions shall be binding on the parties to the partition. 
(2) A partition of a tenancy shall not, without the express consent of the landlor d, affect the joint 
liability of the co -sharers therein for the payment of the rent thereof. 
111. Application for partition. —Any joint owner of land, or any joint tenant of a tenancy in which a 
right of occupancy subsists, may apply to a Revenue -officer for partition of his share in the land or 
tenancy, as the case may be, if — 
(a) at the date of the application the share is recorded under Chapter IV as belonging to hi m, or 
(b) his right to the share has been established by a decree which is still subsisting at the date, or 
(c) a written acknowledgement of that right has been executed by all persons interested in the 
admission or denial thereof. 
112. Restriction and limitations on partition.—Notwithstanding anything in the last foregoing 
section — 
(1) places of worship and burial grounds held in common bef ore partition shall continue to be so held 
after partition, unless the parties otherwise agree among themselves and record their agreement and file it 
with the Revenue -officer; 
(2) partition of any of the following properties, namely: — 
(a) any embankment, watercourse, well or tank, and any land on which the supply of wat er to any 
such work may depend, 
(b) any grazing -ground, and 
(c) any land which is occupied as the site of a town or village and is assessed to land revenue; 
may be ref used if in the opinion of the R evenue -officer the partition of such property is likely to cause 
inconvenience to the co- shares or other persons directly o r indirectly interested therein or to diminish 
the utility thereof to these persons; 
34 
 (3) the fact tha t a partition on the application of a joint owner of land would render necessary the 
severance into two or more parts of the land comprised in the tenancy of a tenant having a right of 
occupancy may, unless the tenant assents to the severance, be a suffici ent reason for the disallowance of 
the partition in so far as it would affect that tenancy; and 
(4) the fact that the landlord objects to the partition of a tenancy may be sufficient reason for the 
absolute disallowance of the partition thereof. 
113. Notic e of application for partition. —The Revenue -officer, on receiving the application under 
section 111, shall, if it is in order and not open to objection on the face of it, fix a day for the hearing thereof, and — 
(a) cause notice of the application and of th e day so fixed to be served on such of the recorded 
co-shares as have not joined in the application, and, if the share of which partition is applied for is a 
share in a tenancy, on the landlord also; and 
(b) if he thinks fit, cause the notice to be served on, or proclaimed for the information of, any other 
persons whom he may deem to be directly or indirectly interested in the application. 
114. Addition of parties to application. —On the day fixed for the hearing, or on any day to which 
the hearing ma y be adjourned, the Revenue -officer shall ascertain whether any of the other co-sharers 
desire the partition of their share also, and, if any of them so desire, he shall add them as applicants 
for partition. 
115. Absolute disallowance of partition. —After examining such of the co -shares and other persons 
as may be present on that day, the Revenue -officer may, if he is of opinion that there is good and 
sufficient cause why partition should be absolutely disallowed, refuse the application, re cording the 
grounds of his refusal. 
116. Procedure on admission of application. —If the Revenue -officer does not refuse the application 
under the last foregoing section, he shall ascertain the question, if any, in dispute between any of the 
persons interest ed, distinguishing between — 
(a) question s as to title in the property of which partition is sought; and 
(b) questions as to the property to be divided, or the mode of making the partition. 
117. Disposal of questions as to title in property to be divided.— (1) When there is a question as to 
title in any of the property of which partition is sought, the Revenue -officer may de cline to grant the 
application for partition until the question has been determined by a competent Court, or he may himself 
proceed to determine the question as though he were such a Court. 
(2) Where the Revenue -officer himself proceeds to determine the question, the following rules shall 
apply, namely:— 
(a) If the question is one over which a Revenue Court has jurisdiction, the Revenue -officer shall 
proceed as a Revenue Court under the provisions of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 (XVI of 1887). 
(b) If the question is one over which a Civil Court has jurisdiction, the procedure of the Revenue officer shall be that applicable to the trial of an original suit by a Civil Court, and he shall record a 
judgment and decree containing the particulars required by the Code of Civil Procedure to be specified 
therein. 
35 
 (c) An appeal shall lie from the decree of the Revenue -officer under clause ( b) as though that 
decree were a decree of a district Judge in an original suit. 
(d) Upon such an appeal being made, the Divisional Court or Chief Court, as the case may be, may 
issue an injunction to the Revenue -officer requiring him to stay proceeding pe nding the disposal of the 
appeal. 
(e) From the appellate decree of a Divisi onal Court upon such an appeal a further appeal shall lie to 
the Chief Court if such a further appeal is allowed by the law for the time being in force. 
118. Disposal of other ques tions.—(1) When there is a question as to the property to be divided, or 
the mode of making a partition, the Revenue -officer shall, after, such inquiry as he deems necessary, 
record an order stating his decision on the question and his reasons for the deci sion. 
(2) An appeal may be preferred to the Commissioner from an order under sub- section ( 1) within 
fifteen days from the date thereof, and, when such an appeal is preferred and the institution thereof has 
been certified to the Revenue -officer by the Comm issioner, the Revenue -officer shall stay proceeding s 
pending the disposal of the appeal. 
(3) If an applicant for partition is dissatisfied with an original or appellate order under this section, and 
applies for permission to withdraw from the proceeding s in so far as they relate to the partition of his 
shares, he shall be permitted to withdraw therefrom on such terms as the Revenue -officer thinks fit. 
(4) When an applicant withdraw, under the last foregoing sub- section, the R evenue -officer may, where 
the other applicants, if any, desire the continuance of the proceeding, continue them in so as far they 
relate to the partition of the shares of those other applicants. 
119. Administration of property excluded from partition. —When any such property as is refer red 
to in section 112, clause ( 2), is excluded from partition, the Revenue -officer may determine the extent and 
manner to and in which the co- sharer s and other persons interested therein may make use thereof, and the 
proportion in which the expenditure inc urred thereon and profits derived therefrom, respectively, are to be 
borne by and divided among those persons or any of them. 
120. Distribution of revenue and rent after partition. —(1) The amount of revenue to be paid in 
respect of each of the holdings int o which land has been divided on a partition, and the amount of rent to 
be paid in respect of each of the portions into which a tenancy has been so divided, shall be determined by 
the Revenue -officer making the partition. 
(2) The deter mination of the Reven ue-officer as to the revenue to be p aid in respect of each holding 
shall, where the estate in which the holding is situate in subject to a fixed assessment, be deemed to be an 
order under section 56, sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Where new estates have been created at a partition and the land- revenue has been fraudulently or 
erroneously distributed among them, the Local Government may, within t welve years from the time of 
discovery of the fraud or error, order a new distribution of the land- revenue among the sever al estates, on 
a estimate of the assets of each estate at the time of the partition, to be made conformably to the best evidence and information procurable respecting the same. 
121. Instrument of partition.—When a partition is completed, the Revenue -office r shall cause an 
instrument of partition to be prepared, and the date on which the partition is to take effect to be recorded 
therein. 
36 
 122. Delivery of possession of property allotted on partition.—An owner or tenant to whom any 
land or portion of a tenancy, as the case may be, is allotted in proceedings for partition shall be entitled to 
possession thereof as against the other parties to the proceedings and their legal representatives, and a 
Revenue -officer shall, on application made to him for the purpos e by any such owner or tenant at any 
time within three years from the date recorded in the instrument of partition under the last foregoing 
section, give effect to that instrument so far a s it concerns the applicant as i f it were a decree for 
immovable pro perty. 
123. Affirmation of partition s privately affected. —(1) In any case in which a partition has been 
made without the interve ntion of a Revenue -officer, any party thereto may apply to a Revenue -officer for 
an order affirming the partition. 
(2) On rece iving the application, the Revenue -officer shall inquire into the case, and, if he finds that 
the partition has in fact been made, he may make an order affirming it and proceed under sections 119, 
120, 121 and 122, or any of those sections, as circumstances may require, in the same manner as if the partition had been made on an application to himself under this Chapter. 
124. Power to make rules as to costs of partitions. —The Financial Commissi oner may make rules 
for determining the costs of partitions under this Chapter and the mode in which such costs are to be 
apportioned. 
125. Re -distribution of land according to custom. —When by established custom any land in an 
estate is subject to periodic al re- distribution of a Revenue -officer may, on the application of any of the 
land- owners, enforce the re -distribution according to the custom, and for this purpose may exercise all or 
any of the powers of a Revenue -officer in proceeding s, for partition. 
126. Officers who may be empowered to act under this Chapter. —The Revenue -officer by whom 
proceedings may be taken under this Chapter shall be a Revenue -officer of a class not below that of 
Assistant Collector of the first grade. 
________ 
CHAPTER X. 
A
RBITRATION. 
127. Power to refer to arbitration.— (1) Any Revenue -officer may, with the consent of the parties, 
refer to arbitration any dispute arising before him in any matter under this Act. 
(2) A Collector or any Assistant Collector of the first grade may, without the consent of the parties, 
refer to arbitration any dispute before him with respect to— 
(a) any matter of which an entry is to be made in any record or register under Chapter IV; 
(b) any matter relating to the distribution of an assessment und er section 56; 
(c) the limits of any estate or of any holding, field or other portion of an estate; or 
(d) the property to be divided at a partition or the mode of making a partition. 
128. Order of reference and contents thereof. —(1) In referring a dispute to arbitration a 
Revenue -officer shall make an order of reference, and specify therein the precise matter submitted to 
37 
 arbitration, the number of arbitrators which each party to the dispute is to nominate, the period within 
which arbitrators are to be nominated, and the period within which the award is to be delivered. 
(2) The number of arbitrators which each party may nominate must be the same and must not exceed 
two. 
(3) If from any cause arbitrators are not nominat ed, or an award is not delivered, within the period 
fixed therefor in the order of reference, the Revenue -officer may from time to time enlarge that period, or 
may cancel the order of reference. 
129. Nomination of arbitrators.— (1) When an order of referenc e has been made, the parties may 
each nominate the number of arbitrators specified in the order, and the Revenue -officer shall nominate 
one other arbitrator. 
(2) The Revenue -officer may, for reasons to be recorded by him, make an order disallowing any 
nomi nation made by either party and requiring the party to make another nomination within a time to be 
specified in the order. 
(3) An order under the last foregoing sub- section shall be final. 
130. Substitution of arbitrators by parties.—If an arbitrator nomi nated by the party dies, desires to 
be discharged or refuses or becomes incapable to act, the party may nominate another person in his stead. 
131. Nomination and substitution of arbitrators by Revenue -officers. —In any of the fol lowing 
cases, namely; — 
(a) if either of the parties fails to nominate an arbitrator under sub- section ( 1) of section 129 within 
the period fixed in the order of reference, or 
(b) if the nomination of an arbitrator has been disallowed under sub- section ( 2) of section 129, and 
another arbitrator is no nominated within the time specified in the order under that sub- section or, 
having been so nominated, his nomination is also disallowed, or 
(c) if a party entitled to nominate an arbitrator in the place of another arbitrator under 
section 130, fails to nominate him within one week from the date of the communication to him of a 
notice requiring him to make the nomination, or 
(d) if an arbitrator nominated by the Revenue -officer dies, desires to be discharged or refuses or 
becomes incapable to act, 
the Revenue -officer may nominate a person as arbitrator. 
132. Process for appearance before arbitrators. —(1) The Revenue -officer shall, on the application 
of the arbitrators, issue the same processes to the parties and witnesses whom the arbitrators desire to examine as he may issue in any proceeding under this Act before himself. 
(2) Any such party or witness shall be bound to appear be fore the arbitrators in obedience to a process 
issued under sub -section ( 1), either in person or by agent, as the arbitrators may require. 
(3) The person attending in obedience to the process shall be bound to state the truth upon any matter 
respecting whi ch he is examined or makes statements, and to produce such documents and other things 
relating to any such matter as may be specified in the process. 
38 
 133. Award of arbitrators and presentation thereof.— (1) The arbitrators shall make an award in 
writing under their hands concerning the matters referred to them for arbitration, and state therein their 
reasons therefor, and any arbitrator dissenting from the award made by a majority of the arbitrators shall 
state the grounds of his dissent. 
(2) The arbitrator s shall present the award to the Revenue -officer in person unless that officer permits 
them to present it by agent. 
134. Procedure on presentation of award. —(1) When the award has been received, the Revenue officer shall, if the parties are present, consid er forthwith any objection which they may have to make 
thereto, and, if they are not present, fix a date for the consideration thereof. 
(2) Where a date has been fixed for the consideration of an award, the Revenue- officer shall on that 
date, or on any subsequent date to which an adjournment may be made, hear any objections which the 
parties may have to make to the award. 
(3) The Revenue -officer may also, if he thinks fit, question the arbitrators as to the grounds of their 
award. 
135 Effect of award. —(1) The Revenue -officer may accept, modify or reject the award, recording his 
reason s for doing so in his decision respecting the dispute which was referred to arbitration. 
(2) An appeal shall lie from the decision as if arbitrators had not been appointed. 
_______ 
CHAPTER XI. 
SPECIAL JURISDICTION wITH RESPECT TO LAND. 
136. Power to invest officers making records- of-rights or general re -assessments with powers of 
Civil Courts. —(1) The Local Government may, by order published in the official Gazette, invest any 
Revenue -officer making or specially revising records -of-rights in any local area in pursuance of a 
notification under section 32 or making re -assessment of land -revenue in any local area in pursuance of a 
notification under section 49, or any Revenue -officer to whose control that officer is subject, with all or 
any of the powers of any Court constituted under the Punjab Courts Act, 1884 (XVIII of 1884), for the 
purpose of trying all or any specified cl asses of suits or appeals relating to land arising in the local area. 
(2) The Local Government may cancel an order under sub- section ( 1) wholly or in part. 
(3) While an order or any part of an order under that sub- section continues in force, the powers 
conferred thereby shall be exercised by the officer invested therewith and not otherwise. 
(4) Any cases pending before that officer under the order or a subsisting part of the order at the time of 
cancellation thereof may be disposed of by him as if the order or that part of it continued in force, unless 
the Local Government directs, as it is hereby empowered to do, that those cases shall be transferred for disposal to the Courts by which they would have been disposed of if the order had not been publishe d. 
137. Control over such officers and appeals from and revision of their decrees and 
orders. —(1) The Local Government may by notification direct that the provisions of this Act with 
respect to the superintendence and control over Rev enue -officers shall, su bject to any modification of 
those provisions which the Local Government thinks fit, apply to any Revenue -officer, except the 
39 
 Financial Commissioner, who has been invested with the powers of a Civil Court of any of the classes 
specif ied in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 17 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1884 (XVIII of 1884), 
and that appeals shall lie from his decrees and orders to, and his decrees and orders be subject to revision 
by, a Revenue -officer invested under the last f oregoing section with the powers of a Court which would 
be competent under the Punjab Courts Act, 1884, to hear appeals from, or revise, such decree s and orders 
if they had been made by a Court with the powers of which the Revenue -officer who made them ha s been 
invested. 
(2) In the absence of any such notification, a Revenue -officer invested under the last foregoing section 
with the powers of any such Civil Court as aforesaid shall, with respect to the exercise of those powers, 
be deemed to be such a Civil Court for the purpose of the Punjab Courts Act, 1884. 
________ 
CHAPTER XII. 
SUPPLEMENTAL RPOVISIONS. 
Revenue Deposits. 
138. Power to deposit certain sums other than rent. —(1) In either of the following cases, 
namely: — 
(a) when a headman or other landowner, or an assignee of land -revenue, to whom any sum other 
than rent is payable on account of a liability under this Act refuses to receive the sum from, or to grant 
a receipt therefor to, the person by whom it is payable, 
(b) when the person by whom any such sum is payable is in doubt as to the headman or other 
landowner, or the assignee of land- revenue, entitled to receive it. 
that person may apply to a Revenue -officer for leave to deposit the sum in his office, and the 
Revenue -officer shall receive the deposit if, after examining the applicant, he is satisfied that there is 
sufficient ground for the application, and if the applicant pays the fee, if any, which may be chargeable 
on any notice to be issued of the receipt thereof. 
(2) When a deposit has been so received, the liability of the depositor to the headman or other landowner, or the assignee of land–revenue, for the amount thereof shall be discharged. 
139. Procedure in case of deposit on account of a payment due to Government. —If the deposit 
purports to be made on account of any payment due to the Government, it may be credited accordingly. 
140. Procedure in case of other deposits.—(1) A Revenue -officer receiving a deposit purporting to 
be made on any other account shall give notice of the receipt thereof to every person who he has reason to 
believe claims or is entitled to the deposit, and may pay the amount thereof to any person appearing to him to be entitled to the same, or may, if he thinks fit, retain t he deposit pending the decision of a Civil 
Court as to the person so entitled. 
(2) No suit or other proceeding shall be instituted against the Secretary of State for India in Council, or 
against any o fficer of the Government, in respect of anything done by a Revenue -officer under this 
section, but nothing in this sub-section shall prevent any person entitled to receive the amount of any such 
deposit from recovering it from a person to whom it has been paid by a Revenue -officer. 
40 
 Execution of Orders of Civil and Criminal Courts by Revenue -officers. 
141. Orders of Civil and Criminal Courts for execution of processes against land or the produce 
thereof to be addressed to a Revenue- officer. —Orders issued by any Civil or Criminal Court for the 
attachment, sale or delivery of any land or interest in land, or for the attachment or sale of the produce of 
any land, shall be addressed to the Collector or such Revenue -officer as the Collector may appoint in this 
behalf, and be executed by the Collector or that officer in accordance with the provisions of the law 
applicable to the Court issuing the orders and with any rules consistent there with made by the Financial 
Commissioner with the concurrence of the Chief Court and the previous sanction of the Local 
Government. 
142. Attachment of assigned land- revenue.— (1) Not withstanding anything in any other enactment 
for the time being in force, an order issued by any Court for the attachment of assigned land- revenue shall 
require the person by whom the revenue is payable to pay it to the Collector, and the Collector to hold it 
subject to the further orders of the court. 
(2) A payment to the Collector under sub- section ( 1) shall be an effectual discharge to the person 
making it. 
Preservation of attached Produce. 
 143. Preservation of attached Produce.— (1) The attachment of the produce of any land in 
pursuance of an order of any Court or other authority shall not prevent the person to whom the produce 
belongs from reaping, gathering or storing it or doing any other act necessary for its preservation. 
(2) The attaching officer shall do or cause to be done all acts necessary for the preservation of the 
produce if the person to whom it belongs fails to do so. 
(3) When sale of produce follows on its attachment, the pur chaser shall be entitled, by himself or by 
any person appointed by him in his behalf, to enter on the place where the produce is and do all that is necessary for the purpose of preserving and removing it. 
Division of Produce. 
144. Division of produce.—In e ither of the following cases, namely: — 
(a) where land- revenue is paid by division or appraisement of the produce, 
(b) where a superior and an inferior landowner, or two or more shareholders in a holding or 
tenancy, are jointly interested in any produce, and either or any of the landowners or tenants, as the 
case may be, desires the assistance of a Revenue -officer for the purpose of dividing or appraising the 
produce, the provisions of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 (XVI of 1887), with respect to the divisi on 
or appraisement of produce shall apply so far as they can be made applicable. 
Miscellaneous. 
145. Village -cesses.—(1) At any of the following times, namely: — 
(a) when a record -of-rights is being made or specially revised for an estate, 
(b) when the local area in which an estate is situate is being generally re- assessed and before the 
assessment has been confirmed, 
41 
 (c) at any other time on an order made with respect to any estate by the Local Government with the 
previous sanction of the Governor General in Council, 
a Revenue -officer shall prepare a list of village- cesses, if any, levied in the estate which have been 
generally or specially approved by the Local Government, or the title to which has before the passing of 
this Act been judicially established. 
(2) When a list has been prepared for an estate under sub -section ( 1), a village- cess not comprised 
therein shall not be recoverable by suit in any Court. 
(3) The Local Government may impose on the collection of any village -cess comprised in the list such 
conditions as to police or other establishments connected with the village, market or fair in or on account 
of which the cess is levied, as it thinks fit. 
(4) The Governor General in Council may, on a reference from the Local Government, declare 
weather any cess, contribution or due levied in a n estate is or is not a village- cess. 
(5) A declaration of the Governor General in Council under the last foregoing sub- section shall be 
conclusive, and shall not be liable to be questioned in any Court. 
146. Superior landowners ’ dues. —Where a superior landowner is entitled to receive in respect of 
any land from an inferior landowner dues in kind or in cash of fluctuating quantity or amount, the 
Collector may — 
(a) on the application of both landowners, or 
(b) with the previous sanction of the Local Government, on the application either of them, 
commute those dues into a fixed percentage of the land -revenue payable by the inferior landowner in 
respect of the land. 
147. Substitution of service for payment of land- revenue.—(1) The Local Government may, with 
the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council, authorize the remission of land -revenue in 
whole or in part in consideration of the person liable therefor undertaking to render in lieu thereof such public service as may be specified in an agreement to be approved by the Local Government and executed by that person. 
(2) The Local Government may, with the like sanction, cancel any remission authorized, and 
agreement made, under sub -section ( 1). 
 (3) If a landowner bound by an agreement under that sub- section to render public service in lieu of 
paying land- revenue fails, to render the serv ice to the satisfaction of the c ollector, the collector may 
determine the portion of the land- revenue remitted which is represented by the servi ce in respect of which 
the land owner is in default, and, with the previous sanction of the f inancial Commissioner, recover that 
portion as if it were an arrear of land- revenue due in respect of the land for the land- revenue whereof the 
service was substituted. 
148. Recovery of cost of assessing assigned land -revenue. —(1) When land of which the land revenue has been assigned in whole or in part is re- assessed, the assignee shall be liable to pay such a 
share of the cost of making the re- assessment as the Financial Commissioner may determine to be just. 
42 
 (2) That share may be recovered by the Colle ctor by the deduction of the amount thereof from the 
land- revenue due to the assignee. 
149. Penalty for failure to attend within limits of estate in obedience to order of Revenueofficer. —If a person required by a summons, notice, order or proclamation proceeding from a R evenue officer to atte nd at a certain time and place within the limits of the estate in which he ordinarily resides, or 
in which he holds or cultivates land, fails to comply with the requisition, he shall be liable at the 
discret ion of t he Revenue -officer to fine which may extend to fifty rupees. 
150. Prevention of encroachment on common lands.—( 1) Where land which has been reserved for 
the common purposes of the co- sharers therein has been encroached on by any co -sharer, a Revenue office r may, on the application of any other co- sharer, eject the encroaching co -sharer from the land and, 
by order proclaimed in manner mentioned in section 22, forbid repetition of the encroachment. 
(2) The proceedings of the Revenue -officer under sub -section (1) shall be subject to any decree or 
order which may be subsequently passed by any Court of competent jurisdiction. 
151. Papers kept by village -officers to be deemed public documents. —(1) Any record or paper 
which a village- officer is required by law, or by any rule under this Act, to prepare or keep shall be 
deemed to be the property of the Government. 
(2) A village -officer shall, with respect to any such record or paper in his custody, be deemed for the 
purpose s of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (I of 1872), to be a public officer having the custody of a 
public document which any person has a right to inspect. 
152. Costs.— (1) A Revenue -officer may give and apportion the costs of any proceeding under this 
Act in any manner he thinks fit. 
(2) But if he orde rs that the cost of any such proceeding shall not follow the event, he shall record his 
reasons for the order. 
153 Computation of periods limited for appeals and application s for review.—In the computation 
of the period for an appeal from, or an application for the review of, an order under this Act the limitation 
therefor shall be governed by the Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (XV of 1877). 
154. Restriction on Revenue -officer s bidding at auctions or trading.—(1) A Revenue -officer, or a 
person employed in a revenue -office, shall not — 
(a) purchase or bid for, either in person or by agent, in his own name or in that of another, or jointly 
or in shares with others, any property which any Revenue -officer or Revenue Court in the District in 
which he is employed ha s ordered to be sold, or, 
(b) in contravention of any rules made by the Local Government in this behalf, engage in trade in 
that district. 
(2) Nothing in sub- section ( 1) shall be deemed to preclude any person from becoming a member of a 
company incorporate d under the Indian Companies Act, 1882, (VI of 1882) or other law. 
155. Power to make rules.—( 1) The Financial Commissioner may, in addition to other rules which 
may be made by him under this Act, make rules consistent with this Act, and any other enactment for the 
time being in force — 
43 
 (a) fixing the number and amount of the installment s, and the times and places and the manner, by, 
at and in which any sum other than rent or land- revenue which is payable under this Act or of which a 
record has been made the re under is to be paid; 
(b) fixing the dates on which profits are to be divisible by headman or other persons by whom they 
are realized on behalf of co -sharers; 
(c) prescribing the fees to be charged for the service and execution of processes issued by 
Revenue -office rs and Revenue Courts, the mode in which those fees are to be collected, the number of 
persons to be employed in the service and execution of those processes, and the remuneration and 
duties of those persons; 
(d) regulating the procedur e in the cases where persons are entitled to inspect records of Revenue officers, or records or papers in the custody of village -officer, or to obtain copies of the same, and 
prescribing the fees payable for searches and copies; 
(e) prescribing forms for such books, entries, statistics and accounts as the Financial Commissioner 
thinks necessary to be kept, made or compiled in revenue -offices or submitted to any authority; 
(f) declaring what shall be the language of any of those offices, and determini ng in what cases 
persons practis ing in those offices shall be permitted to address the presiding off icers thereof in 
English; and 
(g) generally for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Until rules are made under clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub- section ( 1) the sums therein referred to shall 
be payable by the installments, at the times and places, and in the manner by, at and in which they are 
now payable. 
(3) Rules made by the Financial Commissioner under this or any other sec tion of this Act shall not 
take effect until they have been sanctioned by the Local Government, and rules under clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) shall not take effect until they have also been confirmed by the Governor General in 
Council. 
156. Rules to be made after previous publication. —The power to make any rules under this Act is 
subject to the control of the Governor General in Council, and to the condition of the rules being made after previous publication: 
157. Powers exercis eable by the Financial Commissioner from time to time. —All powers 
conferred by this Act on The Financial Commissioner may be exercise d from time to time as occasion 
requires. 
Exclusion of Jurisdiction of Civil Courts. 
158. Exclusion of jurisdiction of Civil Courts in matters within the jurisdiction of Revenue officers—Except as otherwise provided by this Act — 
(1) a Civil Court shall not have jurisdiction in any ma tter which the Local Government or a Revenue officer is empowered by this A ct to dispose of, or take cognizance of the manner in which the Lo cal 
Government or any Revenue -officer exercises any powers vested in it or him by or under this Act; and in 
particular — 
44 
 (2) a Civil Court shall not exercise jurisdiction over any of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) any question as to the limits of any la nd which has been defined by a R evenue -officer as land to 
which this Act does or does not apply; 
(ii) any claim to compel the performance of any duties imposed by this Act or any other enactment 
for the time being in force on any Revenue -officer, as suc h; 
(iii) any claim to the office of kanungo, zaildar, inamdar or v illage -officer, or in respect of any 
injury caused by exclusion from such office, or to compel the performance of the duties or a division 
of the emoluments thereof; 
(iv) any notification directing the mak ing or revision of a record -of-rights; 
(v) the framing of a record -of-rights or annual record, or the preparation, signing or attestation of 
any of the documents included in such a record; 
(vi) the correction of any entry in a record- of-rights, annual record or register of mutations; 
(vii) any notification of the undertaking of the general re -assessment of a district or tahsil having 
been sanctioned by the Governor General in Council; 
(viii) the claim of any person to be liable for an assessment of land -revenue or of any other revenue 
assessed under this Act; 
(ix) the amount of land- revenue to be assessed on any estate or to be paid in respect of any holding 
under this Act; 
(x) the amount of, or the liability of any person to pay, any other revenue to be assessed under this Act, 
or any cess, charge or rate to be assessed on an estate or holding under this Act or any other enactment for 
the time being in force; 
(xi) any claim r elating to the allowance to be received by a landowner who has given notice of his 
refusal to be liable for an assessment, or any claim connected with, or arising out of, any proceedings taken in consequence of the refusal of any person to be liable for an assessment under this Act; 
(xii) the formation of an estate out of waste land; 
(xiii) any claim to hold free of revenue any land, mills, fisheries or natural products of land or 
water; 
(xiv) any claim connected with, or arising out of, the collection by the Government, or the enforcement 
by th e Government of any process for the recovery, of land -revenue or any sum recoverable as an arrear of 
land-revenue; 
(xv) any claim to set aside, on any ground other than fraud, a sale for the recovery of an arrear of land revenue or any sum recoverable as an arrear of land -revenue; 
(xvi) the amount of, or the liability of any person to pay, any fees, fines, costs or other charges imposed 
under this Act; 
(xvii) any claim for partition of an estate, holdi ng or tenancy, or any question connected with, or arising 
out of, proceedings for partition, not being a question as to title in any of the property of which partition is 
sought; 
45 
 (xviii) any question as to the allotment of land on the partition of an estat e, holding or tenancy, or as to 
the distribution of land subject by established custom to periodical re -distribution, or as to the distribution 
of land- revenue on the partition of an estate or holding or on a periodical re -distribution of land, or as to the 
distribution of rent on the partition of a tenancy; 
 (xix) any claim to set aside or disturb a division or appraisement of produce confirmed or verified by a 
Revenue -officer under this Act; 
 (xx) any question relating to the preparation of a list of v illage -cesses or the imposition by the Local 
Government of conditions on the collection of such cesses; 
(xxi) any proceeding under this Act for the commuta tion of the dues of a superior land -owner; 
(xxii) any claim arising out of the enforcement of an agr eement to render public service in lieu of paying 
land-revenue; or 
(xxiii) any claim arising out of the liability of an assignee of land- revenue to pay a share of the cost of 
collecting or re -assessing such revenue, or arising out of the liability of an as signee to pay out of assigned 
land-revenue, or of a person who would be liable for land- revenue if it had not been released, compounded 
for or redeemed to pay on the land- revenue for which he would but for such release, composition or 
redemption be liable, such a percentage for the remuneration of a zaildar, inamdar or village -officer as may 
be prescribed by rules for the time being in force under this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 THE SCHEDULE. 
(See section 2.) 
ENACTMENTS REPEALED. 
Number and year. Title or subject of enactment. Extent of repeal. 
1 2 3 
Act XXI of 1836 Creation of new Zilas. So much as has not been 
repealed. 
Act VI of 1867. To enable the Lieutenant Governor of the 
Punjab to alter the limits of existing 
districts in any part of the territories under 
his government. The whole. 
 
Act VI I of 1870. The Court fees Act, 1870. In section 20, clause ( i), the 
words “and Revenue,” and the 
whole of section 23. 
Act XXXII I of 1871. The Punjab Land -Revenue Act, 1871. The whole. 
Act IV of 1872. The Punjab Laws Act, 1872. Section 21. 
Act XVIII of 1884. The Punjab Courts Act, 1884. Chapter VI. 
Regulation I of 1872. The Punjab Frontier Regulation, 1872. Rules 26 to 46 (both inclusive), 
comprising sections G, H, I and 
K of the Hazara Settlement 
Rules.